ViewOnline
ExportCitation
RESEARCH ARTICLE |  FEBRUARY 21 2018
Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects of atomic
layer deposition process 
Petteri Peltonen; Ville Vuorinen; Giovanni Marin; Antti J. Karttunen; Maarit Karppinen
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 36, 021516 (2018)
https://doi.org/10.1116/1.5018475
Articles You May Be Interested In
Numerical modeling of carrier gas flow in atomic layer deposition vacuum reactor: A comparative study of
lattice Boltzmann models
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (November 2013)
A numerical approach on the selection of the purge flow rate in an atomic layer deposition (ALD) process
Physics of Fluids (May 2022)
Simple model for atomic layer deposition precursor reaction and transport in a viscous-flow tubular reactor
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (December 2011)
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects of atomic layer deposition
process
Petteri Peltonena) and VilleVuorinen
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
Giovanni Marin, Antti J.Karttunen, and MaaritKarppinen
Department of Chemistry and Materials Science, Aalto University, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
(Received 7 December 2017; accepted 6 February 2018; published 21 February 2018)
Computational ﬂuid dynamics investigations on the mixing process of gases inside an atomic layer
deposition (ALD) reactor are carried out. A test case involving a real ALD reactor geometry is
investigated under nonreacting, incompressible ﬂow assumption. The relatively low Reynolds
number (Re) of the test reactor, often being in the laminar regime, advocates the usage of scale-
resolving simulations. The authors investigate mixing of two precursors in two different injection
conﬁgurations for 40< Re < 2400. The feasibility of the approach is shown and discussed. The
results illustrate how both Reynolds number and injection conﬁgurations inﬂuence the precursor
distribution in the ALD reactor. The authors also carry out a set of experiments in the same ALD
reactor and discuss them in light of the simulations.Published by the AVS.
https://doi.org/10.1116/1.5018475
I. INTRODUCTION
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) enables the fabrication of
various thin-ﬁlm materials in a highly controllable manner.1
The early developments of the ALD technique by Puurunen
et al.were driven by applications in the ﬁeld of electrolumi-
nescent displays,2 and nowadays, the rapidly increasing
interest in ALD is mainly driven by applications in the
microelectronics and semiconductor industry in general. 3
The ALD thin-ﬁlm growth process is based on sequential,
self-limiting gas–surface reactions as illustrated in Fig.1.
The growth rate is typically described in terms of growth per
cycle (GPC, units A˚ or nm). As an example, we discuss the
deposition of an aluminum oxide (Al2O3) thin ﬁlm on a sili-
con substrate. First, a pulse of trimethylaluminum (TMA) is
introduced to the nitrogen carrier gas that is constantly ﬂow-
ing into the ALD reactor (the pressure in the reactor is typi-
cally as low as 10–20 hPa). The pulse lengths are highly
dependent on the ALD reactor type and the nature of the
substrate. For ﬂat, nonporous substrates, pulse lengths
between 0.1 and 1 s are rather typical, while for high-aspect
ratio substrates and porous substrates, the pulse lengths can
be several seconds.4 The TMA molecules absorb on the sili-
con substrate and react with the OH groups on the substrate
surface in a self-limiting fashion. When all possible surface
sites have reacted, the TMA molecules in the gas phase can
no longer react with the surface and are purged out of the
reactor by the nitrogen carrier gas. After the purging, a pulse
of water vapor (H2O) is introduced into the reactor. The
water molecules react with the surface in a self-limiting fash-
ion, and the water molecules remaining in the gas phase are
purged out by the carrier gas. These four steps (TMA pulse–
purge–water pulse–purge) constitute one ALD cycle and
repeating the cycles produces an Al2O3 thin ﬁlm.
In comparison to other thin-ﬁlm techniques, ALD offers
exceptional conformality on high aspect ratio structures.
This is a key advantage in the fabrication of semiconductor
devices, where continuous and pinhole-free ﬁlms need to be
deposited on more and more complex substrates. The thick-
ness of the ALD-fabricated thin ﬁlms can typically be con-
trolled at the level of 10–10m( A˚). The technique is relatively
slow in comparison to techniques such as chemical vapor
deposition and therefore the ALD-grown thin ﬁlms are usu-
ally from a few nanometers to about 100 nm thick. The
inherent features and scalability of ALD make it also a very
attractive technique for coating of nanostructured, nanopo-
rous, or even ﬁbrous substrates such as textiles.4
The ﬂow rates, pulse and purge times, as well as the tem-
perature in an ALD process are empirical parameters opti-
mized for each application speciﬁcally. Usually, the main
criterion is the quality of the deposited ﬁlm, which can easily
lead to precursor waste, long cycle times, and high setup
costs without the gain of information on why the process
behaves as it does. While previous experimental studies
have demonstrated that the efﬁciency of the ALD process is
heavily inﬂuenced by the precursor concentrations and thus
the carrier gas ﬂow,1,5 the number of both numerical and
experimental studies focusing on the ﬂuid dynamical aspects
is rather limited. A possible explanation for such a research
gap could originate from the wide range of time and spatial
scales involved in the process making both measurements
and numerical studies difﬁcult to conduct.
Since the ALD growth process is a multiscale phenome-
non encompassing time and spatial scales from atomistic
surface reactions to reactor-level ﬂuid dynamics, many dif-
ferent modeling approaches have been applied to the various
parts of the process. In their study on modeling of continuous
ﬂow ALD reactors, Holmqvistet al. reviewed previous
mathematical models for ALD processes.6 Since we focus
on ﬂuid dynamical aspects of the ALD growth here, we
shortly discuss recent studies in this direction.
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; electronic mail:
petteri.peltonen@aalto.ﬁ
021516-1 J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 36(2), Mar/Apr 2018 0734-2101/2018/36(2)/021516/11/$30.00 Published by the AVS. 021516-1
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


Lankhorst et al.7 used a transient and three-dimensional
ﬁnite volume model to study the precursor transport and
deposition reactions in a multiwafer vertical batch ALD
reactor ﬁlled with high aspect ratio trenched wafers. They
noticed that for trenched wafers, the timescales are much
longer than for ﬂat wafers. Moreover, Shaeriet al.8 used a
three-dimensional and transient ﬁnite volume model to opti-
mize the ﬂow patterns and deposition rates in two different
precursor injection conﬁgurations. They noticed that GPC
increases as the temperature of the substrate is increased and
stated that the larger GPC is caused by higher reaction rates
and concentrations of the oxygen atoms on the substrate. In
a very similar study by Denget al.,9 the authors noticed that
while higher temperature increases GPC, it has a little
impact on the precursor distribution.
In a series of publications, Panet al. ﬁrst carried out a
comparative study of lattice Boltzmann (LBM) models for
steady and two-dimensional ALD reactor ﬂow.10 They
noticed that the results of the LBM models were in an agree-
ment with a traditional continuum-based ﬁnite volume
model. Later on, Pan et al. used a transient and three-
dimensional ﬁnite volume model along with a surface
reaction model based on laminar ﬂow assumption and two-
reaction mechanism to study the ﬁlm growth in a real reactor
geometry.11 Based on the numerical and experimental
results, the authors observed that the GPC varies based on
the location where the sample is placed inside the reactor.
The experimental GPC was also noticed to be correlated
with the numerically obtained precursor concentration, the
highest GPC being in the regions where the precursor con-
centrations were highest. In the latest work by Panet al.,12
the authors extend the chemical kinetics mechanism to
account for more reactions and investigated the ALD process
emission and waste. They noticed that the ALD process has
a very high material waste rate with about 60% of the pre-
cursors being wasted.
A summary of the previous numerical work on ALD is
presented in TableI. The focus of many of the previous stud-
ies has been on model development and comparison or opti-
mizing the ﬁlm growth. In the present paper, the aim is to
study the ﬂuid dynamical aspects inside the reactor chamber
by a Reynolds number and injection conﬁguration sweep. It
is of particular interest to better understand the precursor
mixing characteristics and surface coverage. Thus, we
assume that the precursors are transported (convected and
diffused) without surface reactions. We then construct spa-
tial maps of the GPC, which depend purely on the precursor
concentrations under different conditions. To do this, we
solve the carrier gas motion with an unprecedented accuracy.
Further, we link the numerical results to experiments and
discuss the ﬁlm growth rate and the ﬂuid dynamical aspects
related to it. The objectives of the present work are listed
below. First, we investigate the feasibility of scale-resolving
computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulations in ALD
studies. Second, we investigate the sensitivity of the sample
surface coverage on the Reynolds number under turbulent
and laminar conditions. Third, by using the numerical model,
we investigate two injection conﬁgurations and discuss the
results in light of the experiments.
The paper is structured as follows. In Sec.II, we present
the numerical and experimental methods used in the study.
In Sec.III, we present the results of the simulations starting
from visualizations of instantaneous ﬂow features in the
reactor and then moving onto time-averaged quantities. At
the end of Sec.III, we compare the numerically predicted
ﬁlm growth to experimental ﬁlm thickness. We conclude the
results and observations in Sec.IV.
II. METHODS
A. Reaction chamber geometry and operation
The reaction chamber studied in this paper is from the
Picosun model R-100 ALD reactor (Fig.2). In the chamber,
carrier gas is ﬂowing constantly in from four lines (lines
1–4) and out of the chamber from a single outlet at the bot-
tom. During the precursor pulses, the precursor is injected
into one of the carrier gas lines well before the chamber. The
carrier gas line, to which the precursors are injected, can be
FIG. 1. (Color online) Illustration of the ALD growth process.
TABLE I. Positioning the present study in the context of previous CFD-ALD studies.
Author 2D/3D Mesh Transient Surf. chem. Main focus
Holmqvist et al.(Ref. 6) 2D 1.5 /C2 103 Yes Yes Mechanistic model development
Lankhorst et al.(Ref. 7) 3D Unspeciﬁed Yes No Trench model development
Shaeri et al.(Ref. 8)3 D 3 2 /C2 103 Yes Yes Injection conﬁguration and thermal effects
Pan et al.(Ref. 10) 2D Unspeciﬁed No No Comparison of LBM models
Pan et al.(Ref. 11) 3D Unspeciﬁed Yes Yes Physical and chemical details
Pan et al.(Ref. 12) 3D Unspeciﬁed Yes Yes Emission and waste
Xie et al.(Ref. 13) 2D Unspeciﬁed Yes Yes Mechanistic model development
Xie et al.(Ref. 14) 2D Unspeciﬁed Yes Yes Emission and waste
Present 3D 3 :4=6 /C2 106 Yes No Fluid dynamical aspects and Re sweep
021516-2 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-2
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, Vol. 36, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2018
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


altered in the reactor, and in the present paper, we study two
conﬁgurations of the injection:opposing injection and per-
pendicular injection. In the opposing injection conﬁguration,
ﬁrst precursor is injected to one of the carrier gas lines (line
1, for example) and the second one to the opposite carrier
gas line (line 3). In the perpendicular injection conﬁguration,
the precursors enter the chamber from lines axially perpen-
dicular to each other (line 1 and line 2, for example).
Approximately 20 mm below the roof of the chamber
there is a grid structure to enhance the spreading of the pre-
cursors, and the grid is supported by a circular beam attached
to the roof of the chamber. The grid consists of symmetri-
cally drilled circular holes with a diameter of 4 mm. The
wafer is placed in the chamber on top of a circular plate,
which in reality, is held in place by support beams attached
to the grid part. These supports are not modeled in the simu-
lations and they are not visible in Fig.2. During the deposi-
tion, the reactor is heated to the speciﬁed temperature by an
oven surrounding the gray geometry presented in Fig.2 and
a substantial length of the gas lines. In addition, the bound-
ary conditions in the simulations are assigned to the inlet and
outlet patches.
Figure 3 shows a sequence of volumetric renderings of
the precursors to illustrate how the reactor is operated. In the
example, ﬁrst precursor is injected from line 1 and starts to
slowly ﬁll up the chamber volume at time instancest1 to t3.
The purging of the ﬁrst precursor with the carrier gas, which
is not visible in Fig. 3, begins at approximately t4. Since
purging is a very slow process, typical purge times are in the
order of 5–10 times the respective pulse time. The snapshot
at t6 is taken approximately at the halfway of the purge phase
of precursor 1. The injection of precursor 2 begins just
before the snapshott7 and the injection comes from line 2.
B. Simulations
The ALD-process involves not only chemical but also
strong ﬂuid dynamical phenomena which can be approached
via CFD simulations as is done herein. In such simulations,
the macroscopic ﬂow domain is divided into a mesh of small
elements. The governing conservation equations are the
Navier-Stokes equations which can be discretized locally in
the ﬁnite-volume framework by formulating the ﬂux-balance
between the adjacent elements. The discretization leads
eventually to a global system of equations the solution of
which offers the time-space dependent velocity and pressure
ﬁelds. For low-Reynolds number laminar ﬂows, the ﬂow
equations can be directly solved while for turbulent, high-
Reynolds number ﬂows a turbulence model can be applied
to account for the dissipation occurring in the unresolved
smallest ﬂow scales below the spatial resolution. In the pre-
sent work, the relatively low Reynolds number of the ﬂows
advocates usage of a scale-resolving approach with minimal
amount of modeled numerical dissipation.
It is known that the gas exchange involves low speed
ﬂow which is injected through a complex inlet valve con-
ﬁguration. However, various unknowns about the exact
inlet boundary conditions further motivate to simplify the
problem. Hence, as justiﬁed by the low Mach number of
the ﬂow, the gas is modeled as being incompressible.
Additionally, we assume that the gas is isothermal with
constant ﬂuid properties in the modeled region. Such
assumption is considered to be reasonable since the gases
entering the reactor are heated well before the reactor by a
large oven surrounding both the reactor and the gas lines.
Thereby, the governing equation is the incompressible
Navier-Stokes (N-S) equation
@u
@t þr/C1ð uuÞ¼/C0 1
q rp þ /C23Du; (1)
where u is the velocity,p the pressure, and/C23 the kinematic
viscosity of the ﬂuid. Conservation of mass is guaranteed by
the continuity equation
r/C1 u ¼ 0: (2)
In addition to the N-S and continuity equations, additional
scalar transport equations are solved to describe the precur-
sor transport. We assume that the precursors appear in small
FIG. 2. (Color online) Reaction chamber geometry and the naming used
throughout the work. The gray area indicates the modeled region and the
sketches representing the precursor line and outlet extension are only for
illustration and not modeled.
FIG. 3. (Color online) Precursor behavior during a single cycle at Re¼ 80.
The region where the sample lies is highlighted in the ﬁgure.
021516-3 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-3
JVST A - Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


quantities behaving as passive scalars which do not alter the
properties of the carrier gas. The scalar transport equations
read
@c
@t þr/C1ð ucÞ/C0 /C23cDc ¼ 0; (3)
where c is the scalar and/C23c is the diffusivity of the scalar.
By modeling the precursors as passive scalars, the following
assumptions are made:
(1) The ﬂuid properties of the carrier gas do not change
when mixed with the precursor.
(2) The precursors do not affect the ﬂuid momentum.
(3) The precursors do not interact with each other.
(4) The surface reactions are not taken into account.
Thereby, in the present work, the precursors can be con-
sidered to act similar to small, passive tracers following the
ﬂuid ﬂow. Since the overall motivation is to understand the
ﬂuid dynamical mixing within the reaction chamber, we
resort to unity Schmidt numberSc ¼ /C23//C23c assumption for all
the scalars. In the paper, altogether four passive scalars are
injected from the four nozzles so that the opposing and adja-
cent injection conﬁgurations can be simultaneously studied.
The discrete form of the governing equations is solved
using the unstructured, second order accurate ﬁnite volume
method based on the open sourceCþþ library OpenFOAM.15
The velocity and pressure ﬁelds are solved sequentially
using a predictor-corrector type PISO algorithm16 as imple-
mented in pisoFoam solver in OpenFOAM. For time discre-
tization, an implicit, second order accurate, three time-level
scheme is adopted. In the convection term, the convective
ﬂux is interpolated linearly while the convecting quantities
are interpolated by a limited, second order accurate scheme.
The diffusion terms are discretized by centered schemes. As
discussed in the previous paper by Vuorinenet al.,17 the
PISO method includes a diffusive correction term which is
removed here as motivated by the previous study. The solver
used in the present study has been successfully used by the
authors in a sequence of papers.17–19
A section of the 6M cell mesh used in the simulations is
presented in Fig.4. The mesh is unstructured and consists of
mostly hexahedral cells. The highest resolution is at the
upper-most part of the domain and the mesh is allowed to
signiﬁcantly coarsen toward the outlet of the chamber.
Further, the simulations are run with a ﬁxed Courant number
of 0.8.
The ﬂow Reynolds number based on the inlet pipe diame-
ter (D) is deﬁned as Re¼ qUD/l ¼ UD//C23. As the deﬁnition
shows, under incompressible and isothermal assumption, the
ﬂow is essentially characterized by a single nondimensional
number, i.e., the Reynolds number alone. By studying a
wide range of Reynolds numbers, we are able to investigate
the ﬂow behavior as a function of one compact parameter
under various operating conditions. For example, the carrier
gas ﬂow rates can range from 150 to 250 sccm, pressure
between 10 and 20 hPa, and temperature between 150 and
250/C14 C, depending on the application. In the present work,
we study Reynolds numbers Re ¼ 40, 80, 200, 800, and
2400. The lower bound of the Reynolds numbers is chosen
assuming a constant ﬂow rate of 200 sccm, temperature of
220 /C14 C, and pressure of 15 hPa for nitrogen,20 resulting in
Re ¼ 38. The upper bound (2400), on the other hand, is cho-
sen such that the ﬂow in the inlet pipes is already turbulent.
The other studied Reynolds numbers are more biased to the
expected laminar regime and chosen based on small test
runs indicating representative examples of the system
characteristics.
The simulated test cases as well as the elapsed processing
time (CPU time) are tabulated in Table II. For the low
Reynolds number cases (A-C) a mesh containing 3.4M cells
is used and two full cycles are simulated. For the high-
Reynolds number cases (D and E) a denser mesh is used and
a single cycle is simulated. In cases A-E the inlet ﬂow rates
are set to correspond to the carrier gas ﬂow rate (200 sccm)
and kept constant throughout the simulation. In addition to
cases A-E, we simulate a half-cycle case (F) in which the
ﬂow rate at one of the inlets is increased by 50% to 300 sccm
for the duration of the pulse and then set back to 200 sccm
for the purge. The purpose of case F is thereby to study the
FIG. 4. Sections of the 6 M cell mesh.
TABLE II. Simulated test cases. TheDmin value describes the smallest cell
width excluding the boundary layer cells.
Case Re No. cycles No. cells Dmin yþ
max CPU time (h)
A 40 2 3.4M D/30 0.14 21384
B 80 2 3.4M D/30 0.21 24960
C 200 2 3.4M D/30 0.4 41976
D 800 1 6M D/40 0.7 61920
E 2400 1 6M D/40 1.9 100224
F 40 1/2 3.4M D/30 0.18 5459
021516-4 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-4
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, Vol. 36, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2018
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


sensitivity of the precursor behavior to the increased ﬂow
rate, and the results are discussed in Sec.III D. In cases D
and E, the pipe ﬂow at each inlet line is recycled from 6D
downstream of each inlet patch to ensure a realistic boundary
condition in the high-Reynolds number cases. In the laminar
cases, the well-known parabolic pipe ﬂow velocity proﬁle is
fully developed at the nozzle exit, although a top-hat proﬁle
is assigned to the inlet patch.21
Since the precursors are modeled as passive scalars, the
boundary conditions for the precursors at the inlet patches
are set to unity for both precursors during the pulses and
zero during the purges. At the outlet, Neumann (zero gradi-
ent) condition is applied for both velocity and the precursors.
For pressure, Dirichlet condition (ﬁxed zero) is applied at
the outlet. It should be noted that, due to the incompressibil-
ity assumption, the pressure at the outlet can be ﬁxed to an
arbitrary constant.
C. Experiment details
In the experiments, TMA and water are used for deposi-
tion with pulse and purge times of 0.2 and 1 s, respectively,
for both precursors. During the deposition, the temperature
in the chamber is controlled by an oven surrounding the
chamber which is heated to 220/C14 C. The temperature sensors
inside the reactor chamber indicated65 /C14 C ﬂuctuation in the
temperature. The pressure in the chamber varies between 10
and 20 hPa during the deposition, the highest pressure values
are obtained during the precursor pulses. Nitrogen is used as
a carrier gas and the ﬂow rate of nitrogen is set to 200 sccm
for all the four inlets. The ﬁlms are deposited on standard
test grade 100 mm silicon wafers. The inlet of TMA is kept
constant while the water source is altered to obtain the
opposing and perpendicular injection conﬁgurations. The
thickness measurements are carried out with a SEMILAB
SE-2000 spectroscopic ellipsometer. Thickness is measured
in 25 evenly spaced locations around the circular wafer. The
reactor operating conditions are listed in TableIII. It should
be noted that the experimental conditions are not optimized
for the deposition but the injection time scales are set short
enough to enable feasible computational runtime.
III. RESULTS
A. Flow visualization
Instantaneous time snapshots of the velocity ﬁelds for all
the Reynolds numbers are presented in Fig.5. As can be seen,
the ﬂow above the grid is governed by four jets entering the
reactor from lines 1 to 4. At Re¼ 40 and 80, the ﬂow appears
laminar and the jet spreading is highly diffusive (I) before the
impingement to the support. Consistently, at Re¼ 200 and
800, the jet mixing appears less diffusive resulting in a stron-
ger impingement effect and increased vortex shedding with
increased Reynolds number (II). Finally, at Re¼ 2400, the
incoming pipe ﬂow is turbulent (III) and further turbulence is
produced by the jet shear layers. At Re¼ 2400, the jet–sup-
port interaction is also harder to distinguish by visual analysis.
In the ALD-process, the precursor concentration distribu-
tion on the sample plate is of primary interest. As Fig.5
implies, the ﬂow velocity ﬁeld is strongly dependent on the
Reynolds number. Instantaneous concentration snapshots for
precursor 1 are shown in Fig.6, indicating clear Reynolds
number dependence as well. As the unity Schmidt number
assumption implies, diffusion of the scalars follows consis-
tently the Reynolds number: low-Re indicates higher diffusion
while high-Re indicates increased turbulent mixing resulting
in a qualitatively different mixing pattern. Figure6 implies
that while the laminar cases do not exhibit shear layer instabil-
ities, at Re¼ 2400, the well-known Kelvin–Helmholtz type
wave instability growth close to the nozzle exit is observed.
TABLE III. Summary of the reactor operating conditions.
Pressure 10–20 hPa
Temperature 220 /C14 C
Pulse length (both precursors) 1 s
Purge length (both precursors) 0.2 s
Residence timeðV= _QtotalÞ 1.125 s
N2 ﬂow rate _Q 4 /C2 200 sccm
N2 Reynolds number 38
Precursors TMA/Water
FIG. 5. (Color online) Instantaneous velocity ﬁelds on the midsection of the
inlet pipes.
021516-5 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-5
JVST A - Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


Figure 6 also implies that after ﬂuid dynamical interactions
above the grid, the ﬂow falls eventually through the grid
impinging on the sample plate.
B. Time-averaged velocity distribution
During the jet injection, the incoming streamwise
momentum becomes distributed to the transverse directions
by three main mechanisms: momentum diffusion (all cases),
jet shear layer Kelvin-Helmholtz instability growth and tur-
bulence (primarily at Re¼ 2400), and jet-support impinge-
ment. Considering the ﬂow streamlines based on the time-
averaged velocity ﬁelds, Fig.7 indicates the jet momentum
transfer into multiple recirculation zones spanning the entire
volume above the grid. For example, at Re¼ 40, altogether
eight such low speed zones are formed in the (x, z)-plane and
the zones are enveloped by the jet shear layer, support, and
the reactor walls. At a higher Reynolds number, the
recirculation patterns become more complex due to the
stronger impingement on the support.
We observe that for all the cases not only do large recir-
culation zones appear in the vessel but the ﬂow also turns
down toward the sample plate passing through the grid holes.
The grid induces small individual jets that eventually
impinge on the sample plate. An essential observation is that
different grid passage modes can be identiﬁed for the differ-
ent cases. Figure8 shows the time averaged velocity magni-
tude right below the reactor grid. At Re /C20 200, the
momentum distribution is rather smooth and spreads to a
broad region spanning multiple grid holes due to the
enhanced diffusion effects. In contrast, at Re¼ 800, there is
primary ﬂow through an area spanning only 4–8 grid holes.
For the moderate value Re¼ 800, the jet–support impinge-
ment causes not only coherent vortex shedding but also a rel-
atively dominant and conﬁned jet through the grid due to the
relatively low diffusion and absence of turbulence. Finally,
for the highest value Re¼ 2400, the turbulence leads to high
mixing above the grid which broadens the momentum distri-
bution below the grid to span a region of about 6/C2 6g r i d
holes.
Above, it was noted that the Reynolds number related
ﬂuid dynamical mixing mode (diffusive, dynamic, and turbu-
lent) above the grid has a strong link to the ﬂow momentum
distribution below the grid. Further insight to the ﬂow struc-
tures below the grid is seen in Fig.9(a) where the isosurface
of time-averaged velocity magnitude is shown for Re¼ 80
and 800. The jet formed below the grid via the diffusive mix-
ing mode at Re¼ 80 is observed as a single jet structure,
while at Re¼ 800, the dynamic mixing mode is seen to cre-
ate four separate jets. The turbulence intensity close to the
sample plane is shown in Fig.9(b) which indicates expect-
edly vanishing ﬂow ﬂuctuation for laminar ﬂow. In contrast,
a strong link between ﬂuctuating ﬂow close to the wall and
the four separate jets are observed at Re¼ 800.
FIG. 6. (Color online) Section of the instantaneous precursor ﬁelds at approxi-
mately midway through the injection for Re¼ 40 (top) and Re¼ 2400 (bottom).
Only the precursor ﬁeld is colored in the ﬁgures.
FIG. 7. (Color online) Streamlines of the average velocity ﬁeld at the mid-
section of the inlet pipes. The planes are colored by the mean velocity mag-
nitude U/Uin.
FIG. 8. (Color online) Time-averaged velocity ﬁeldsU/Uin just below the
grid part of the reactor for Re¼ 40, 800 and 2400 from left to right, respec-
tively. (a) The time averaged value of parallel to the grid velocity compo-
nent isocontour at/C22u ¼ Uin=36 for Re¼ 80 (left) and Re¼ 800 (right). (b)
Turbulence intensity I ¼ u0
rms=Uin in percentages for Re ¼ 80 (left) and
Re ¼ 800 (right) slightly above the plane where the sample lies. Note the
two different color scales.
021516-6 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-6
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, Vol. 36, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2018
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


C. Averaged scalar distributions on the sample plane
The time development of the spatial average of a precur-
sor on the sample plane is illustrated in Fig. 10 for all
Reynolds numbers. Note that the spatial averaging is carried
out separately on four equal-sized sectors. At Re/C21 200, the
peak value of the concentration on Q1 (on the injection side)
occurs immediately after the end of the pulse, but with
Re ¼ 40 and 80, there is a delay between the end of the pulse
and the maximum value. This delay is caused by the ﬂow
characteristics at low Reynolds number. As explained ear-
lier, at low Reynolds numbers, the spreading of the precursor
is strongly diffusion driven, which is a slow process com-
pared to convection at higher Reynolds numbers. For the
same reason, at Re¼ 40, the maximum value of the concen-
tration on the opposite side of the injection (Q3) occurs
clearly after the maximum value at the injection side (Q1).
Already at Re¼ 80, the maximum values at all sectors occur
almost simultaneously.
For Re/C20 200, the time development of the concentra-
tions at sectors Q2 and Q4 follow each other quite closely.
This is caused by the symmetry of the geometry and
absence of turbulence. For Re¼ 800 and 2400, turbulence
causes unsteady ﬂow structures appearing as oscillations in
the curves of Fig.10. It should be noted that if more cycles
were simulated for Re¼ 800 and 2400, the concentrations
at sectors Q2 and Q4 should overlap in a manner similar to
the cases A–C (Re/C20 200). Moreover, at Re¼ 800, the con-
centration at the opposite sector (Q3) has clearly smaller
values compared to other Reynolds numbers. This is caused
by the ﬂow characteristics through the grid at Re¼ 800 as
discussed earlier.
From surface coverage point of view, the pulse time could
possibly be reduced by increasing the Reynolds number.
However, the effect this would have on the ﬁlm growth is dif-
ﬁcult to assess without detailed model of the surface chemis-
try. Moreover, it is interesting to notice that the purging of the
precursor is not heavily dependent on the Reynolds number
and remains a slow process. The last traces of the precursor
are purged away from the sample during very last stages of
the purge phase at all Reynolds numbers.
To illustrate the surface coverage dependence on
the Reynolds number, Fig. 11 shows the pulse-averaged
precursor concentrations on the sample plane. Here, the
pulse-average denotes a time-average carried over a half
ALD-cycle (pulseþ purge) for which the precursor is
expected to remain in the chamber. The distributions are
seen to pose a strong directional coupling: for a given pre-
cursor, higher concentrations are observed on the same side
from where the given precursor was injected for all the stud-
ied Reynolds numbers. Moreover, the low Reynolds number
cases (Re< 800) indicate a rotational symmetry due to the
symmetry of the geometry. This symmetry is broken for the
two highest Reynolds numbers due to turbulence and insufﬁ-
cient total number of simulated cycles for the averages to
completely converge. Further, the Re ¼ 800 case appears
qualitatively different from the other cases as the dynamic
mixing mode seems to cause a less homogeneous surface
distribution focused very strongly on the injection side of the
FIG. 9. (Color online) Illustrations of the grid passage modes and increase of
turbulence intensity at higher Reynolds number.
FIG. 10. Spatial average of a precursor on the sample as a function of time
during a half-cycle. The averages are presented in four equal sized sector
sectors (Q1–Q4) for all Reynolds numbers. The gray region indicates the
time of the pulse and the arrow the injection direction.
021516-7 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-7
JVST A - Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


support. Moreover, a strong negative spatial correlation can
be seen between the precursors in opposing injection conﬁg-
uration and a mild positive one in the perpendicular injection
conﬁguration.
In order to quantitatively compare the ﬁlm growth rate
between measurements and simulations we introduce a
growth rate factork ¼ (c1c2)/(c1 þ c2) for the probability of
ﬁlm growth based purely on the concentrations of the precur-
sors (see theAppendix). It should be noted that, in reality,
although full surface coverage is reached, the ﬁlm growth is
not guaranteed since the precursors may not react with the
surface. The reaction rate at the surface also depends on
parameters such as temperature, adsorption kinetics, steric
hindrance, and the surface roughness. A thorough discussion
of these factors related to the surface chemistry can be found
from the review of Puurunen22 (see Sec.III). We emphasize
that these are not taken into account ink.
Figures 12 and 13 show the distributions ofk for perpen-
dicular and opposing injection conﬁgurations, respectively.
In the measurements, the Reynolds number of the carrier gas
is approximately 38. The simulated growth rate factor for the
perpendicular injection conﬁguration (Fig.12) at all
Reynolds numbers shows certain similarities with the mea-
sured surface thickness. Both indicate a higher growth on the
quarter closest to the injection of the precursors. However,
for the opposite injection conﬁguration, the observed pat-
terns differ substantially, in particular, for the Re¼ 800 case.
There may be multiple reasons for the discrepancy between
the simulations and the experiments; however, the most
likely one is the absence of surface reactions from the
numerical model. Moreover, due to the passive nature of the
precursors, the increase of ﬂow rate during the precursor
pulses was not taken into account in the results of Figs.12
and 13.
When comparing the measured surface thickness between
the two injection conﬁgurations, a clear difference can be
seen. While both injection conﬁgurations show a bias in the
thickness on the TMA injection side, in the opposing injec-
tion conﬁguration also shows a formation of islands of
higher thickness. After 50 ALD cycles, there are two islands
on the TMA side, and after 600 cycles, three separate islands
can be distinguished. As all other operation parameters were
kept the same and only the injection conﬁguration changed,
the injection conﬁguration and thus the ﬂow characteristics
seem to have a clear impact on the ALD process.
D. Sensitivity to flow rate increase
Within the scope of this paper, a simulation F was carried
out only to assess the mixing sensitivity to potentially
increased ﬂow rate by precursor injection. In simulation F,
the ﬂow rate from the precursor line was increased by 50%
during the pulse and set back to 200 sccm during the purge.
The ﬂow rate from the other lines was kept the same as in
cases A–E, and the Reynolds number in simulation F is
Re¼ 40.
Figure 14(a) illustrates how the sample surface concentra-
tion averages change between simulation cases A and F.
When the ﬂow rate is increased, the highest precursor con-
centration is shifted more toward the center of the sample
and the average concentration is overall more uniform. In
addition, two separate islands of high concentration form on
the opposite side of the injection. Such islands can be
explained by the changed ﬂow pattern in the upper part of
the reactor as depicted in Fig.14(b). As Fig.14(b) shows,
the higher momentum in the injection line causes the jet
stream to impinge on the support beam dividing the stream
to two recirculation zones on the opposite side of the cham-
ber. Such recirculation zones enhance the transport of pre-
cursor concentration to those regions. Eventually, the ﬂow
falls down the grid to the sample plane and, in fact, the recir-
culation pattern explains the island formation process.
FIG. 11. (Color online) Pulse-averaged scalar concentrations (c/c0) on the
sample. The injection directions are presented by the triangle in the ﬁgure.
021516-8 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-8
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, Vol. 36, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2018
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


It is interesting to note the similarity of the average con-
centration contours for the increased ﬂow rate to the mea-
sured surface thickness after 600 cycles for the opposing
injection conﬁguration (Fig.13). Based on the fact that, in
the measurements, the highest growth rate tends to be biased
to the TMA side of the sample, one possible explanation for
the similarity could be that the water pulse is injected to the
reactor with higher ﬂow rate than TMA. However, taking
into account the lack of surface chemistry and the exact
knowledge of the ﬂow characteristics at the inlet boundary,
the similarity is challenging to explain thoroughly by the
present simulations alone. Nonetheless, the increased ﬂow
rate seems to have a clear impact on the precursor distribu-
tion and could be one explanation for the minute agreement
in the previous results.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
A numerical study on the carrier gas and precursor ﬂow
inside an ALD reactor chamber was conducted. Since the
FIG. 12. (Color online) Simulatedk correlation for all Reynolds numbers
and the measured surface thickness in the perpendicular injection conﬁgu-
ration. The small dots in the thickness maps indicate the locations of the
measurement probes while the triangles indicate the directions of the pre-
cursor sources with respect to the sample. The lower triangle indicates the
TMA injection and the right triangle the injection of water.
FIG. 13. (Color online) Simulatedk correlation and the measured surface
thickness after 50 and 600 cycles in the opposing injection conﬁguration. (a)
The pulse-averaged scalar concentration for constant ﬂow rate during the
pulse (left) and 50% increased ﬂow rate (right). (b) Streamlines on the mid-
section of the inlet lines during the pulse. The arrow indicates the line with
increased ﬂow rate.
021516-9 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-9
JVST A - Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


chemical reactions in the ALD process were neglected, only
a qualitative agreement with the measurements was
obtained. However, a scale-resolving simulation was found
feasible, although, at high Reynolds numbers, the computa-
tional cost becomes high. The largest challenge for accu-
rately resolving the ﬂow in ALD applications originates
from the long time scales involved in the process and geo-
metrical complexity of a typical reactor restricting the maxi-
mum time step.
The simulations indicated relatively strong changes in the
ﬂow characteristics between the lowest and the highest
Reynolds numbers. While the required pulse time could be
reduced by increasing Reynolds number, no signiﬁcant gain
was found in the total length of the ALD-cycle as purging
remains a slow process due to increased turbulence.
Moreover, time-dependent ﬂow structures could be observed
already at Re¼ 200. At Re ¼ 800, the strong jet-support
impingement caused low precursor mixing in the upper part
of the reactor resulting in less homogeneousk distribution
on the sample plane. Ideally, the precursors should be homo-
geneously distributed in the reactor chamber already during
the precursor pulse to allow for shorter pulse times and more
homogeneous ﬁlm growth. Further, the different ﬂow pat-
terns observed at different Reynolds numbers indicate that
various reactor speciﬁc geometric details and operating con-
ditions may have an important role on the gas ﬂow. Thus,
successful modeling of the complete ALD process requires
quite likely a scale-resolving CFD approach which has the
detailed information on the inﬂow mass ﬂow rates.
Additionally, it may be required to combine the CFD model
with a microscopic description of the surface chemistry, e.g.,
by kinetic Monte Carlo studies derived from density func-
tional theory.23
Based on this study, we have found primarily computa-
tional evidence on the relevance of the mixing conﬁguration
on the surface coverage. Moreover, since in the measure-
ments the only change was the injection conﬁguration, we
can conclude that the precursor concentration on the surface
of the sample has an impact on the ﬁlm uniformity. In the
perpendicular injection conﬁguration, the agreement between
the simulated ﬁlm growth rate (measured here in the simpli-
ﬁed parameterk) and the measurements was reasonable, but
in the opposing injection conﬁguration, the agreement was
minute. At least one explanation for the minute agreement
was found to be the treatment of the precursors as passive
scalars. The precursors not only affect the properties of the
carrier gas-precursor mixture, but also increase the mass ﬂow
rate during the pulses, which was noticed to substantially
change the precursor concentration on the sample. Moreover,
for better predictions of the ﬁlm growth, the surface reactions
or at least the consumption of the precursors on the sample
should be taken into account.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The computational resources for this study were provided
by CSC—Finnish IT Center for Science. The authors thank
Picosun for providing them the 3D model of the Picosun R-
100 ALD reactor chamber and for the ellipsometry. G.M.,
A.J.K., and M.K. gratefully acknowledge funding from the
Strategic Research Council at the Academy of Finland
(CloseLoop Consortium, Grant No. 303452).
APPENDIX: DERIVATION OFk
In order to assess the surface growth rate, we next aim at
forming a numerical metric indicating the joint correlation
between the two precursor concentrations (c1 and c2). The
aim is to form a metric for improved qualitative evaluation
of local growth rate and qualitative comparison between the
simulations and the experiments. We consider a simpliﬁed,
stochastic model process for the mean growth rate of a mac-
roscopic surface element on the resolved CFD-scaleDx to
which precursors 1 and 2 attach and react with a probability
proportional to concentrationsc1 and c2. It is clear that this
assumption neglects various aspects of surface chemistry
and thermodynamical conditions (e.g., reaction does not nec-
essarily follow from attachment). However, we consider that
a formalism similar to the one shown below could be equally
well formulated for more detailed surface chemistry by
proper modiﬁcation of the reaction probabilities.
We assume that a sample surface element can be in two
states: state (1) precursor 1 has attached on the surface,
awaiting for precursor 2, or state (2) precursor 2 has attached
on the surface, awaiting for precursor 1. A layer of thickness
Dh is completed once the precursor 2 has attached, i.e., the
FIG. 14. (Color Online) Effect of increased ﬂow rate during the pulse at
Re ¼ 40.
021516-10 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-10
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, Vol. 36, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2018
 06 December 2024 13:07:29


system is in state 2. Observing the system in statei at dis-
crete timen occurs at probabilitiespn
i which satisfy the fol-
lowing recursion equations:
pnþ1
1 ¼ pn
1ð1 /C0 c2Þþ pn
2c1; (A1)
pnþ1
2 ¼ pn
2ð1 /C0 c1Þþ pn
1c2: (A2)
Assuming a steady statepnþ1
i ¼ pn
i and noting thatp1 þ p2
¼ 1 gives
p1 ¼ 1
1 þ c2
c1
; (A3)
p2 ¼
c2
c1
1 þ c2
c1
: (A4)
The expectation value of the ﬁlm thicknesshn is deﬁned
to increase by the layer thicknessDh in case precursor 2
attaches and reacts on the surface. There are only a few ele-
mentary cases which can take place. The expectation value
of the thicknesshn obeys the following recursion equation:
hnþ1 ¼ p1ð1 /C0 c2Þhn þ p2hn þ p1c2ðhn þ DhÞ: (A5)
For example, the thickness of the system is unchanged
(hnþ1 ¼ hn) in case the system is in state 1 (probabilityp1)
and precursor 2 does not attach on the surface (probability 1
– c2) yielding the ﬁrst term in the equation. Rearranging the
terms leads to
hnþ1 /C0 hn ¼ c1c2
c1 þ c2
Dh; (A6)
from which we identify the growth factork
k ¼ c1c2
c1 þ c2
: (A7)
If precise knowledge on the attachment and reaction proba-
bilities (instead of c1 and c2) in different thermochemical
conditions were known, the deﬁnition ofk could be changed
accordingly. For example,c1 could be replaced with a more
complex dependency.
1S. M. George,Chem. Rev110, 111 (2010).
2R. L. Puurunen,Chem. Vap. Deposition20, 332 (2014).
3R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist, and S. F. Bent,Mater. Today17, 236 (2014).
4G. N. Parsons, Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured Materials
(Wiley, Weinheim, Germany, 2012), pp. 271–300.
5R. Kuse, M. Kundu, T. Yasuda, N. Miyata, and A. Toriumi,J. Appl. Phys.
94, 6411 (2003).
6A. Holmqvist, T. T€orndahl, and S. Stenstr€om, Chem. Eng. Sci.81, 260
(2012).
7A. Lankhorst, B. Paarhuis, H. Terhorst, P. Simons, and C. Kleijn,Surf.
Coat. Technol.201, 8842 (2007).
8M. R. Shaeri, T. C. Jen, and C. Y. Yuan,Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer78,
1243 (2014).
9Z. Deng, W. He, C. Duan, B. Shan, and R. Chen,Vacuum 123, 103
(2016).
10D. Pan, T. Li, T. C. Jen, and C. Yuan,J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A32, 01A110
(2014).
11D. Pan, L. Ma, Y. Xie, T. C. Jen, and C. Yuan,J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A
33, 021511 (2015).
12D. Pan, D. Guan, T. C. Jen, and C. Yuan,J. Manuf. Sci. Eng.138, 101010
(2016).
13Y. Xie, L. Ma, D. Pan, and C. Yuan,Chem. Eng. J.259, 213 (2015).
14Y. Xie, D. Pan, L. Ma, and C. Yuan,J. Cleaner Prod.133, 338 (2016).
15H. G. Weller, G. Tabor, H. Jasak, and C. Fureby,Comput. Phys.12, 620
(1998).
16R. Issa,J. Comput. Phys.62, 40 (1986).
17V. Vuorinen, J.-P. Keskinen, C. Duwig, and B. Boersma,Comput. Fluids
93, 153 (2014).
18J.-P. Keskinen, V. Vuorinen, O. Kaario, and M. Larmi,Comput. Fluids
122, 123 (2015).
19J.-P. Keskinen, V. Vuorinen, O. Kaario, and M. Larmi,Int. J. Numer.
Methods Fluids82, 171 (2016).
20P. J. Linstrom and W. G. Mallard, NIST Chemistry WebBook, NIST
Standard Reference Database Number 69 (National Institute of Standards
and Technology, Gaithersburg, 2001).
21F. M. White,Viscous Fluid Flow(McGraw-Hill Mechanical Engineering)
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 2005), Vol. 3.
22R. L. Puurunen,J. Appl. Phys97, 121301 (2005).
23M. Shirazi and S. D. Elliott,J. Comput. Chem.35, 244 (2014).
021516-11 Peltonen et al.: Numerical study on the fluid dynamical aspects 021516-11
JVST A - Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films
 06 December 2024 13:07:29
