www.advmatinterfaces.de
FULL PAPER
1800268 (1 of 15) ©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim
Pt–Graphene Contacts Fabricated by Plasma 
Functionalization and Atomic Layer Deposition
René H. J. Vervuurt, B. Karasulu, Nick F. W. Thissen, Yuqing Jiao, Jan-Willem Weber, 
Wilhelmus (Erwin) M. M. Kessels, and Ageeth A. Bol*
DOI: 10.1002/admi.201800268
electronic devices,[1,2] while its broadband 
absorption makes it suitable for use in 
high speed photodetectors. [3] To further 
improve graphene device performance and 
make optimum use of graphene’s prop-
erties, the ability to deposit high quality 
metal contacts on graphene is required.[4,5] 
Above all, the resistance between the con-
tact metal and the graphene has to be low, 
typically less than 10% of the total device 
resistance. Despite significant advances 
over the past few years, the contact resist-
ances typically obtained are often still 
several times higher than required and 
therefore this remains a bottleneck for 
future device applications.
The metal–graphene contact resistance 
is influenced by a number of material 
and device parameters including the work 
function of the contact metal,[6–9] the inter-
action strength between the contact metal 
and the graphene,[7,8] the type of contact 
(top or edge),[5,10–12] and the possible pres-
ence of resist residue (from the graphene 
transfer or patterning processes) between the metal and the 
graphene.[13–15] Different contact metals have been tested in the 
literature (Ni, Cu, Pd, Ti, Au, Ag, etc.) to minimize the contact 
resistance. Each metal offers certain advantages and disadvan-
tages in terms of interaction strength with the graphene and 
shift of the Fermi level (contact doping). [6–9] In general, the 
stronger interacting metals (Pd, Ni, and Ti) have been shown to 
lead to a lower contact resistance. Theoretical work has shown 
that Pt might also give a high-quality metal graphene contact, 
due to its high work function. [9] However, compared to Pd, Pt 
generally has difficulty wetting carbon surfaces, resulting in 
nonuniform films and a high contact resistance.[16]
It has been suggested in the literature that using alternative 
metallization schemes such as atomic layer deposition (ALD) 
might further lower the contact resistance.[5,17] The chemical 
nature of ALD could lead to an improved metal–graphene inter-
action strength compared to physical vapor deposition (PVD) 
techniques. Furthermore, ALD has been shown to enhance the 
wetting of Pt on carbon nanotubes.[18] However, the lack of dan-
gling bonds and the hydrophobicity of the graphene makes it 
difficult to initialize ALD growth on graphene.[19] For example, 
Pt ALD on graphene leads to the preferential deposition of Pt 
on the graphene grain boundaries and defect sites.[20] Though 
Pt–graphene contacts are fabricated by atomic layer deposition (ALD) on  
H 2  and O 2  plasma functionalized graphene. The plasma functionalization of 
graphene enables the growth of uniform Pt layers on graphene by ALD and 
improves the Pt–graphene interaction, which results in a reduced Pt–graphene 
contact resistance. Devices created using a H 2  plasma treatment before Pt ALD 
perform considerably better than the ones created using O 2  plasma treatments 
(Rc = 0.4 ±  0.2 kΩ  µm and Rc = 1.2 ±  0.1 kΩ  µm, respectively). The lower perfor-
mance of the O 2  plasma treatments is attributed to a less favorable Pt–graphene 
oxide interaction and the amorphization of graphene due to the O 2  plasma 
interaction. Supporting the latter, density functional theory calculations indicate 
that the C H groups created by a H 2  plasma treatment leave the π-conjugation 
(by C-p z orbitals) of graphene largely intact, resulting in good in-plane and 
out-of-plane conductivity. The C O groups formed by an O 2  plasma treatment 
however disturb the C-p z character, deteriorating the in-plane conduction of gra-
phene, despite the good out-of-plane conduction. The results indicate that the 
treatment of graphene by H2  plasma is a straightforward approach to improve 
the ALD growth on graphene and reduce the Pt–graphene contact resistance.
Dr. R. H. J. Vervuurt, Dr. B. Karasulu,[+] Dr. N. F. W. Thissen, Dr. J.-W. Weber,  
Prof. W. (Erwin) M. M. Kessels, Prof. A. A. Bol
Department of Applied Physics
Eindhoven University of Technology
P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
E-mail: a.a.bol@tue.nl
Dr. Y . Jiao
Department of Electrical Engineering
Eindhoven University of Technology
P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.201800268.
Atomic Layer Deposition
1. Introduction
Graphene is a promising candidate for postsilicon optical and 
electronic applications, due to its outstanding electronic, optical, 
and thermal properties. The high intrinsic charge carrier 
mobility and large maximum current density make it a favorable 
channel material to be used in, for example, radio frequency 
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
[+]Present address: Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, 
Cavendish Laboratory, 19, J. J. Thomson Avenue, CB3 0HE Cambridge, UK


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (2 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
this offers opportunities for catalytic applications, this growth 
characteristic makes Pt ALD currently unsuitable for the depo-
sition of metal–graphene contacts.
The difficulty of ALD to nucleate on graphene has also been 
observed for the deposition of metal-oxides on graphene. [21,22] 
In the literature, different surface modification techniques have 
been shown to enable uniform metal-oxide ALD through the 
creation of nucleation sites on the graphene that enable ALD 
precursor adsorption.[23–26] These nucleation sites can be func-
tional groups that are either chemisorbed or physisorbed on 
the graphene surface or they can be seed-layers deposited by, 
for example, e-beam evaporation. Among the various modifica-
tion techniques, surface functionalization techniques, such as 
ozone[27,28] or plasma treatments, [29–31] are of particular interest 
for the fabrication of contacts to graphene. This is because 
these surface functionalization techniques often change 
the graphene basal plane by converting the sp 2C bonds to  
sp3 bonds upon plasma exposure through the creation of 
chemisorbed functional groups. [30] While this conversion to 
sp3 carbon is unwanted if the graphene is used as a channel 
material, it has been shown in the literature that plasma treat-
ments of graphene under the metal contacts can aid in the 
injection and extraction of carriers into the graphene. This can 
lower the contact resistance, a result of the improved metal–gra-
phene interaction.[12,32–34] Furthermore, the plasma treatment 
removes polymer residues remaining on the graphene from 
the graphene transfer process that would normally prevent a 
good contact between the graphene and the contact metal. [32] 
The use of plasma functionalization in combination with Pt 
ALD therefore might make it possible to deposit Pt uniformly 
on graphene, while simultaneously improving the Pt–graphene 
contact resistance. Apart from an improved contact resistance, 
the increased Pt–graphene interaction might also be beneficial 
for catalytic applications.[35,36]
In this work, Pt–graphene contacts have been fabricated 
by ALD on H 2 and O 2 plasma functionalized graphene. The 
influence of H 2 and O 2 plasma treatments on the Pt–graphene 
interaction, and the resulting contact resistance, is investigated. 
First, the effect of H2 and O2 plasma treatment on the structural 
properties of graphene is examined by Raman spectroscopy  
and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The functional 
groups created by the H 2 and O 2 plasma pretreatments make 
it possible to uniformly grow Pt on graphene by ALD. Area-
selectivity of the Pt ALD process is achieved using photosen-
sitive polyimide as the blocking layer. Polyimide is used to 
accommodate the relatively high processing temperature of 
thermal Pt ALD (300 °C).[37] This makes it possible to fabricate 
circular transfer length method (CTLM) structures to deter -
mine the quality of the Pt ALD–graphene contacts, and inves-
tigate the effect of the plasma treatment time on the contact 
resistance. The Pt ALD devices are compared to reference Pt– 
graphene devices fabricated by electron beam lithography (EBL) 
and e-beam evaporation. Furthermore, ab initio calculations are 
used to gain insight into the influence of the H 2 and O2 plasma 
treatments on the Pt–graphene interaction at a molecular level. 
Specifically, changes in the in-plane and out-of-plane conduc-
tivities as a consequence of the attachment of hydrogen and 
oxygen containing functional groups and their influence on the 
contact resistances are investigated.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Influence of Plasma Functionalization on the  
Properties of Graphene
To study the functional groups created by the H2 and O2 plasma, 
and how the plasma treatments affect the structure of the gra-
phene, XPS and Raman spectroscopy were used to analyze the 
plasma treated graphene samples. XPS provides information on 
the various surface groups created during the plasma exposure, 
while Raman spectroscopy can be used to monitor the structure 
of the graphene.[38–40] Before plasma functionalization, the gra-
phene samples were annealed at 400 °C in a 5% Ar/H2 mixture 
for 2 h, to minimize the polymer residues on the graphene as a 
result of the transfer process to SiO2/Si substrates.[41] XPS meas-
urements were performed on a graphene sample treated with a 
5 min H2 or 5 min O2 plasma, and compared with a pristine gra-
phene sample. The XPS measurements of the C 1s spectrum are 
shown in Figure 1. The main contribution for pristine graphene 
is related to sp2C (97.5%). In addition, a small amount (2.5%) 
of C O bonding can be observed, possibly related to polymer 
residues remaining on the graphene or surface groups present 
at defect sites and grain boundaries.[41] A 5 min H2 plasma treat-
ment results in the partial conversion of sp 2C to sp 3 bonds 
(23%). Although C H bonds cannot be observed directly by 
XPS, the conversion of sp 2 to sp 3 is a good indication for the 
formation of these bonds. [31] The treatment of the graphene by 
a 5 min O2 plasma results in an increase in the amount of CO 
bonding (17.3%), indicating the creation of epoxy (C OC) or 
hydroxyl (COH) groups on the graphene. Furthermore C O 
bonds (4.9%) are formed, most likely in the form of carbonyl 
groups. Carbonyl groups do not distort the sp2C configuration, 
therefore they are most likely formed at the edges of the gra-
phene or incorporated in the graphene lattice as defects.
To confirm the change in hybridization and the formation of 
functional groups observed by XPS, Raman spectroscopy meas-
urements were performed on graphene samples exposed to  
H2 and O2 plasmas for different durations. Figure 2a shows the 
Raman spectra obtained for graphene exposed to H2 plasmas for 
2–8 min. Figure 2b shows graphene treated with an O 2 plasma, 
for 1–5 min together with a reference spectrum of pristine gra-
phene. The H2 and O2 plasma functionalization both lead to the 
formation of a D-band (≈ 1350 cm−1) and D′-band (≈1650 cm−1), 
which are related to the functionalization of graphene or the 
formation of defects.[39] The D to D′  ratio can be used to distin-
guish between the formation of defects and functionalization.[40] 
A ratio of ≈ 13 is indicative for the conversion from sp 2 to sp 3 
carbon bonds as a result of the formation of functional groups, 
while a ratio of ≈7 indicates the formation of lattice defects.[40]
The D/D′ ratio for the H2 and O2 plasma treatments is plotted 
in Figure 3a. H2 plasma functionalization predominantly func-
tionalizes the graphene (D/D′ ≈ 10). The ratio also remains 
more or less constant as a function for plasma treatment 
times, ≥3 min. This indicates that the relative amount of func-
tionalization compared to defects stays constant even though 
the graphene is slowly being etched by the H 2 plasma. After  
H2 plasma of 10 min, the graphene was completely etched and 
no peaks related to carbon were observed by Raman Spectros-
copy (data not shown). Similar to a H2 plasma treatment, an  
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (3 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
O2 plasma treatment predominantly functionalizes the graphene 
(D/D′ ≈10) for plasma treatment times below 3 min. Longer 
plasma treatments however result in the formation of defects in 
the graphene (D/D′ < 7). Compared to the H2 plasma, the peaks 
present in the Raman spectra for the O 2 plasma treatment 
also significantly broaden with increasing plasma treatment 
time. This is illustrated in Figure 3b, where the widths of the 
G-band (≈1600 cm −1) and 2D-band (≈2690 cm −1) are plotted as 
a function of the plasma treatment time. For H 2 plasma treat-
ment, the G and 2D bands broaden by 10 cm −1 after 8 min of 
plasma exposure, while for an O 2 plasma treatment the G-band 
broadens by 37 cm −1 and the 2D-band by 70 cm −1 after 5 min. 
This broadening is most likely due to the amorphization of the 
graphene[38] as a result of the O 2 plasma treatment.
Summarizing, the H2 plasma treatment results in the creation 
of C H groups on the graphene and leaves the structure of 
the graphene mostly intact, although some defects are created. 
The O 2 plasma treatment results in the formation of epoxide, 
hydroxide, and carbonyl groups. The formation of these groups 
significantly alters the graphene structure, evident by the amor -
phization of the graphene after 2 min of O2 plasma exposure.
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 1. XPS spectra of the core level C 1s of a) pristine graphene,  
b) graphene after 5 min of H 2  plasma treatment, and c) graphene after 
5 min O 2  plasma treatment. Both plasma treatments were performed at 
a pressure of 50 mTorr and power of 100 W.
Figure 2. Raman spectra obtained after different plasma treatments for 
a) H 2  plasma treatments ranging from 2 to 8 min and b) O 2  plasma treat-
ments from 1 to 5 min. The Raman spectrum of pristine graphene is also 
added as reference. The Raman spectra are normalized to the highest 
peak (D band at 1350 cm−1  or 2D band at 2690 cm −1 ) and are vertically 
offset for clarity.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (4 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
2.2. Pt ALD on Pristine Graphene and Plasma Functionalized 
Graphene
For the fabrication of Pt–graphene contacts, uniform growth 
of Pt on graphene is required. Pt ALD on pristine graphene 
however generally leads to preferential Pt growth on wrinkles, 
grain boundaries, and defects, due to the lack of reactive sur -
face sites and the hydrophobic nature of the graphene sur -
face. This has been shown previously by Karasulu et al. and 
Kim et al., [19,20] and is reiterated here for comparison (see 
Figure 4). Figure 4a shows the pristine graphene before ALD, 
imaged using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The wrin-
kles and bilayer spots present in the graphene are indicated in 
the figure. After 500 cycles of Pt ALD (Figure 4b), no uniform 
growth of Pt is observed on the graphene. Instead Pt growth 
is observed only on wrinkles, grain boundaries, and defect 
sites while no growth occurs on the graphene basal plane, due 
to the lack of reactive surface sites. This confirms the results 
reported previously.[19,20]
The effect of H 2 and O 2 plasma treatments on the nuclea-
tion of Pt ALD is shown in Figure 5. The SEM images show 
an increase of the Pt coverage as a function of both the  
H2 and O 2 plasma treatment time. The functional groups cre-
ated by both the H 2 plasma and the O 2 plasma enhance the 
ALD precursor adsorption on graphene. Small Pt particles are 
present all over the graphene for a H2 plasma treatment time 
of 2 min. The nucleation density of the particles increases, 
combined with a decrease in the nucleation delay as a func-
tion of the plasma treatment time until a closed Pt layer is 
obtained for a plasma treatment time of 5 min. The growth 
per cycle (GPC) of the individual particles is expected remain 
constant in saturation and with a preferential (111) crystal 
orientation. [42] The thickness of the Pt layer on graphene after 
closure was determined to be 16 ±  2 nm, obtained by energy 
dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy analysis using Pt sam-
ples with a known thickness for calibration.[37] Increasing the 
plasma exposure resulted in a gradual increase of the thick-
ness after 500 cycles of Pt ALD to 19 ±  2 nm for the 8 min 
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 3. a) D/D′ peak ratio of the graphene spectra for the different H 2  and O 2  plasma treatment times and b) broadening of the Raman G and 2D 
band as a function of the plasma treatment time, determined from the data in Figure 2.
Figure 4. a) SEM image of pristine graphene after transfer to SiO 2  and anneal 
at 400 ° C. Wrinkles and bilayer graphene are visible in the image. b) SEM 
image of pristine graphene after 500 cycles of Pt ALD at 300 °C. Preferential Pt 
growth occurs on the graphene wrinkles, grain boundaries, and defects sites.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (5 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
H2 plasma exposure, indicating a reduction in the nucleation 
delay. The O 2 plasma treatments show a similar trend; for 
short plasma treatment times Pt particles start to appear over 
the entire graphene surface and the Pt coverage increases for 
longer plasma times. 5 min of O 2 plasma treatment leads to 
an almost closed layer of Pt. The thickness of the areas cov-
ered with Pt is 18 ±  2 nm.
The basal plane of the graphene is more quickly covered 
with Pt when treated with an O 2 plasma (3 min), compared 
to a H 2 plasma treatment. This could indicate a stronger 
adsorption of the Pt precursor on the epoxide, hydroxide, 
and carbonyl groups created by the O2 plasma compared 
to the C H groups created by the H 2 plasma treatment. 
The enhanced adsorption of ALD precursor molecules on  
O2 plasma treated graphene compared to H 2 plasma treated 
graphene has also been observed experimentally for the 
adsorption of trimethylaluminum and was confirmed by 
density functional theory (DFT) calculations. [31] On the con-
trary, large wrinkles present in the graphene are more dif -
ficult to cover by using O 2 plasma functionalization com-
pared to a H 2 plasma (the black lines present in Figure 5d–f). 
The reduced growth observed on the large wrinkles for the  
O2 plasma treatment could indicate that it is more difficult for 
an O2 plasma to create functional groups on or in these wrin-
kles. This could be caused by polymer residues (poly(methyl 
methacrylate), PMMA) remaining on the graphene after the 
graphene transfer process. The polymer residue remaining 
after the graphene transfer tends to gather at the wrinkles 
due to their enhanced reactivity.[43] The ALD of Pt is blocked 
by this residue. [20,44] Therefore, depending on how quickly 
the plasma is able to remove or functionalize the residue, it 
can take longer for growth to occur on these wrinkles. The  
H2 plasma is likely able to remove these residues and func-
tionalize the graphene wrinkles more efficiently compared to 
an O2 plasma.
2.3. Pt ALD Graphene Device Fabrication and the Influence 
of Functionalization on the Contact Resistance
CTLM structures were made to investigate whether the com-
bination of plasma treatment and Pt ALD provides a good 
quality metal–graphene contact. The CTLM structures on 
graphene were created using area-selective ALD (AS-ALD) of 
platinum, using photosensitive polyimide.[37] The polyimide 
can be patterned using photolithography and acts as a blocking 
layer, preventing the adsorption of the MeCpPtMe3 precursor 
in places where polyimide is present. This makes it possible 
to selectively deposit Pt in the opened up regions. Compared to 
other polymers that can be used for the blocking of ALD growth 
polyimide has a relatively high temperature stability (>350 °C). 
This prevents reflowing of the resist during the Pt ALD process 
(performed at 300 °C), allowing for better pattern definition 
and improved uniformity of the Pt features. [37]
Figure 6a,c shows graphene patterned with CTLM struc-
tures. The diameter of the rings ranges between 5 and 48 µ m. 
To initialize ALD growth on graphene, the graphene was 
exposed to varying H2 plasma treatments ranging from 5 to 
20 min and O 2 plasma treatments ranging from 5 to 15 min. 
The plasma times chosen were extended compared to those 
shown in Figure 2. This is because the additional polyimide 
lithography step introduces additional polymer residues on 
the graphene, requiring a longer plasma exposure to obtain 
a similar degree of functionalization when compared to the 
Raman spectra in Figure 2. Without the additional polyimide 
lithography step, all graphene was removed after 10 min of  
H2 plasma exposure. After the additional polyimide lithography 
step, a plasma exposure of 20 min is required to fully etch the 
graphene. This indicates that the plasma needs to etch through 
the polyimide residue before the graphene is functionalized. 
Figure S1 in the Supporting information shows the Raman 
spectra of the CTLM devices.
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 5. SEM image of graphene exposed to different plasma treatments followed by 500 cycles of Pt ALD: a) H 2  plasma 2 min, b) H 2  Plasma 4 min, 
c) H 2  Plasma 5 min, d) O 2  plasma 1 min, e) O 2  plasma 3 min, and f) O 2  plasma 5 min. The Pt surface coverage increases as a function of the plasma 
exposure time for both H 2  and O 2  plasma treatments. d–f) Adapted with permission. [19]  Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (6 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
As an example, the CTLM structures after 5 min H2 plasma 
functionalization and 1000 cycles of Pt ALD are shown in 
Figure 6b,d. No Pt growth is observed on the polyimide, while 
on the graphene a closed Pt layer of ≈36 ± 3 nm thickness is 
obtained. The thicknesses obtained were comparable for all dif -
ferent plasma treatment times (see Figure S2 in the Supporting 
Information) indicating that the differences in nucleation delay 
due to the extended plasma treatment times are small. Further -
more, it should be noted that despite the long plasma treatment 
times, the Pt ALD process remains selective. This shows that 
H2 and O 2 plasma are unable to etch or modify the polyimide 
surface to make it susceptible for ALD, as was previously con-
cluded from spectroscopic ellipsometry and XPS data.[37] Less 
than a monolayer of Pt is deposited on the polyimide during 
the Pt ALD process.
As demonstrated in our earlier work, the catalytic activity of 
these trace amounts of Pt present on the polyimide after ALD 
make it possible to remove the polyimide by a H2 plasma expo-
sure.[37] However, to prevent possible damage to the graphene 
channel during the polyimide removal, the polyimide was not 
etched here.[45,46]
To determine the contact resistance, the resistance of the 
CTLM structures was measured in a vacuum probe station 
using a two-point probe configuration. The samples were 
annealed at 200 °C for 12 h before measuring to remove any 
adsorbed species from the ambient and to improve device 
reproducibility. The voltage was varied from −10 to 10 mV 
while measuring the current. The measurements were per-
formed at room temperature under vacuum (<10 −4 mbar). By 
plotting the resistance determined from the two probe meas-
urements as a function of the gap size d (channel length), the 
contact resistance can be determined from[47–49]
1
2
11 lntots ts sRR L rr d R rd
rπ=+ +

 
 + +


  (1)
where Rs is the sheet resistance of the graphene under the Pt 
contacts, Lt is the transfer length, R ss is the sheet resistance of 
the graphene in the channel, and r the inner radius of the cir -
cular contact. The contact resistance Rc is defined as
cs tRR L=  (2)
For r >> d, Equation (1) can be simplified to
1
2 2tots scR r Rd RCπ ()=+  (3)
where C is a correction factor[50]
lnC r
d
rd
r= +
 
  (4)
The correction factor takes into account the difference 
between the CTLM and TLM methods and makes it possible to 
use a linear fit to extract the contact resistance. In the literature, 
it is often assumed that the sheet resistance of the graphene in 
the channel Rss is equal to the sheet resistance of the graphene 
under the contacts R s, which makes it possible to determine 
the transfer length and specific contact resistivity ρc (RsLt2).[49] 
However, because a plasma treatment is used to initialize the 
Pt ALD growth, the sheet resistance of the graphene under 
the contacts is considerably higher compared to the graphene 
channel. Therefore, this assumption does not hold for the work 
presented here.
Figure 7 shows an example of a fit of Equation (3) to data 
obtained from Pt–graphene contacts created using a 7 min  
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 6. Optical micrograph of a), c) graphene patterned with CTLM 
structures by photolithography using photosensitive polyimide as the 
resist and the same structures b), d) after 5 min of H 2  plasma func-
tionalization and 1000 cycles of Pt ALD. No Pt growth occurs on the 
polyimide allowing for the AS-ALD of Pt. The parameters of Equation (1) 
are indicated in d) as well.
Figure 7. Two-point probe resistance measurement of Pt ALD–graphene 
contacts, Pt ALD growth was initiated by a 7 min H 2  plasma treatment. 
The resistance is averaged over six devices and divided by a correction 
factor C, which takes into account the increase in the contact area with 
increasing ring size. Fitting Equation (3), the contact resistance is deter-
mined to be 0.5 ± 0.2 kΩ.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (7 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
H2 plasma exposure of graphene followed by Pt ALD. The resist-
ance for each channel length was determined from an average 
of at least six different devices. From the intercept with the 
vertical axis, the contact resistance can be determined to be 
0.5 ± 0.2 kΩ µm, while the sheet resistance of the channel 
can be determined from the slope (1.01 ± 0.02 kΩ ◻−1). The 
fits for all other plasma treated samples can be found in the 
supporting information (Figures S3 and S4 in the Supporting 
Information for the H2 and O2 plasma treatments, respectively). 
For reference purposes, also a sample was fabricated using EBL 
and e-beam evaporated Pt (PVD reference devices, Figure S5 
in the Supporting Information). In this case, 35 nm Pt using 
a 1 nm Ti adhesion layer served as the metal–graphene con-
tact. Polyimide is not used to pattern the reference devices, 
because e-beam evaporation also results in the deposition of 
Pt on polyimide, requiring a lift-off step to prevent shorting 
the channel. The lift-off of polyimide however is not straight-
forward. Therefore, PMMA was used for the patterning of the 
reference devices instead. One reference sample was exposed 
to a 5 min H2 plasma before Ti/Pt evaporation to investigate 
the effect of the H 2 plasma treatment on the contact resist-
ance, and compare the difference between ALD and evaporated 
Pt–graphene contacts. An overview of the contact resistances 
and sheet resistances, determined as a function of the plasma 
treatment time, is displayed in Table 1. The development of the 
contact resistance as a function of the plasma treatment time is 
shown in Figure 8.
Figure 8 shows that the contact resistance can be decreased 
when metallization is preceded by an H 2 or O 2 plasma treat-
ment on graphene, irrespective of whether ALD or e-beam 
evaporation is used for the deposition of Pt. The PVD devices 
that received a 5 min H2 plasma treatment have a contact resist-
ance about a factor of three lower compared to the reference 
PVD devices which received no plasma treatment (11.5 ± 0.4 vs  
3.7 ± 0.5 kΩ µm). The improvement of the contact resistance 
is most likely due to the better Pt–graphene interaction as 
a result of the plasma treatment. The surface groups created 
by the plasma treatment enhance the transport of charge car -
riers from the metal to the graphene through an increase of 
the number of chemical bonds between the metal and the gra-
phene.[33] Compared to the PVD deposited contacts, the ALD 
contacts show an even larger improvement. After a 5 min H 2 
plasma, the contact resistance is reduced to 0.9 ± 0.2 kΩ µm. 
The additional improvement observed for the ALD created con-
tacts could be due to the improved wetting interaction of the 
deposited Pt with the underlying graphene or an improved Pt 
morphology due to the use of ALD.[5,18] Additionally, as opposed 
to Pt PVD, for the creation of the Pt ALD contacts, a Ti adhe-
sion layer is no longer required. This could also have a positive 
effect on the metal–graphene interaction, due to the different 
work function and interaction strength of Ti compared to Pt. [8,9]
The lowest contact resistance (0.4 ± 0.2 kΩ µm) is obtained 
after a H 2 plasma treatment of 20 min, where almost no gra-
phene remains under the contacts. For an O2 plasma treatment, 
the contact resistance also decreases as a function of the plasma 
treatment time from 4.2 ± 0.2 kΩ µm for a 5 min pretreatment 
to 1.3 ± 0.2 kΩ µm after 15 min. The improvement however is 
less than observed for a H 2 plasma treatment. The improved 
performance of the H2 plasma functionalized Pt–graphene con-
tacts compared to the O 2 functionalized Pt–graphene contacts 
could be related to the different surface groups being present at 
the interface of the Pt–graphene contacts, as observed by XPS 
(CH vs C O). Furthermore, as revealed by the Raman meas-
urements, in Figure 3b, the O 2 plasma treatment causes amor -
phization of the graphene. The amorphization of graphene 
with increasing oxygen-containing functionalities has previ-
ously been related to the buckling of the graphene basal plane 
and oxygen-doping of the graphene lattice. [19,51] The graphene 
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Table 1. The sheet resistance of the graphene channel (R ss) and contact 
resistance (R c) determined from the CTLM measurements of the Pt–gra-
phene contacts. The different H 2  and O 2  plasma exposure times indicate 
the duration of the plasma used to initiate the Pt ALD growth. For com-
parison also, the contact resistance of the PVD reference devices and 
several literature values are also indicated.
Plasma treatment time Rss [kΩ ◻−1 ] Rc [kΩ µm]
PVD reference 1.33 ± 0.03 11.5 ± 0.4
PVD H 2  plasma treatment
5 min 1.18 ± 0.05 3.7 ± 0.5
PVD O 2  plasma treatment
Au/graphene [33] 0.148 5.56
Pd/Cr/graphene [12] – 1.10
ALD H 2  plasma treatment
5 min 0.83 ± 0.04 0.9 ± 0.2
7 min 1.00 ± 0.01 0.5 ± 0.2
10 min 0.76 ± 0.03 1.2 ± 0.2
15 min 1.10 ± 0.02 0.5 ± 0.1
20 min 1.11 ± 0.03 0.4 ± 0.2
ALD O 2  plasma treatment
5 min 0.70 ± 0.02 4.2 ± 0.2
10 min 0.96 ± 0.03 1.2 ± 0.1
15 min 1.01 ± 0.03 1.3 ± 0.2
Figure 8. Contact resistance determined from the CTLM measurements 
as a function of the H 2  or O 2  plasma treatment time. A comparison is 
made between the devices synthesized by AS-ALD and plasma function-
alization and EBL and e-beam evaporation (PVD).
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (8 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
that remains under the contacts after a O 2 plasma treatment 
is therefore of lower quality compared to the graphene after a  
H2 plasma treatment. Irrespective of the plasma treatment, how-
ever, the lowest contact resistance is obtained for the maximum 
plasma treatment time. A possible explanation could be the 
formation of an edge-like contact, where most of the graphene 
under the contacts is removed and only the edge of the channel 
is contacted. This is schematically illustrated in Figure 9.
To get a better understanding of the performance of our 
Pt–ALD graphene contacts, compared to the more standard 
evaporated metal–graphene contacts, we compared our work 
with refs. [12,32,33], which used similar device structures in com-
bination with plasma treatments. Yue et al. fabricated Cr/Pd–
graphene contacts, with similar device dimensions as the ones  
reported here. The graphene under the contacts was exposed 
to an O2 plasma treatment before contact formation. [12] Short 
plasma treatment times resulted in the formation of a func-
tionalized top contact that showed a small improvement of 
the contact resistance. The use of a longer plasma treatment 
time on the other hand resulted in the formation of an edge-
contact, where only the edge of the contact metal was in contact 
with the graphene. The edge-contact gave the lowest contact 
resistance (1.1 kΩ µm). This low contact resistance was attrib-
uted to the shorter binding distances, and improved orbital 
overlap of the electrons compared to the metal–graphene top 
contacts.[5,10,12] The contact resistance values reported by Yue 
et al. are comparable to the Pt–ALD contacts prepared by an  
O2 plasma as reported here (1.2 kΩ µm). Although a direct com-
parison is hampered by the different contact metal being used, 
this indicates that ALD contacts of similar quality compared to 
evaporated contacts can be created using an O 2 plasma treat-
ment. Our Pt–ALD contacts fabricated using H 2 plasma func-
tionalization showed a lower contact resistance than reported 
(0.4 kΩ µm) indicating that H 2 plasma functionalization might 
be a viable approach to further reduce the contact resistance of 
evaporated contacts as well.
The decreasing contact resistance as a function of the  
O2 plasma treatment time, observed in Figure 8, is opposite to 
the trend observed by Foley et al. who used O 2 plasma func-
tionalization in combination with evaporation to synthesize 
Au–graphene contacts, obtaining a minimum contact resist-
ance of 5.4 kΩ  µm.[33] Since both Au and Pt interact only 
weakly with graphene, (both Au and Pt are expected to benefit 
from functional groups and defects present on the graphene 
surface),[34] a decrease of the contact resistance as a function 
of the O 2 plasma treatment time is expected for both metals. 
The observed increase in contact resistance as a function of 
the O 2 plasma treatment time for Au–graphene contacts 
could be explained by the fact that the Au–graphene contacts 
were not annealed after fabrication. Smith et al. have shown 
that annealing at 350 ° C is required to activate the function-
alization and improve the contact resistance for evaporated 
metal–graphene contacts. [52] For Pt ALD fabricated contacts, 
an anneal is most likely not required since the temperature 
during the ALD process is 300 °C, which is likely sufficient 
to achieve an optimal metal–graphene contact. To confirm 
this, the samples functionalized with 7 min H2 plasma and 
5 min O 2 plasma were annealed at 400 ° C in a 5% Ar/H 2 
mixture for 2 h. This did not change the contact resistance of 
the H2 plasma treated sample (0.2 ±  0.5 vs 0.5 ±  0.2 kΩ  µm) 
and slightly increased it for the O 2 plasma (5.4 ±  0.7 vs 4.2 ±  
0.2 kΩ  µm ). The increase in contact resistance could be due 
to the dewetting of Pt at 400 ° C, which would also explain the 
larger measurement error after annealing.
2.4. Contact Resistance Dependency on the Functionalization  
of the Graphene Using Ab Initio Calculations
To better understand the effect of the H 2 and O 2 plasma func-
tionalization on the contact resistance, ab initio DFT calcula-
tions were performed. The orbital-projected density of states 
(DOS) and band diagrams along the high-symmetry K-points 
(MΓKM path) were computed using the model systems, as 
depicted in Figure 10 (insets). The resulting partial and total 
DOS and band diagrams of the free-standing and Pt-(top)-con-
tacted pristine graphene (PG), graphene oxide (GO), and hydro-
genated graphene (SSHG) are shown in Figures 10 and 11. 
Complete DOS and band structure plots of these systems are 
given in Figures S7–S11 in the Supporting Information, which 
cover different energy regions and/or also include the Pt contri-
butions (these are excluded here for clarity, as the Pt–d orbital 
contributions overshadow others).
The DOS and band structure plots of PG (Figures 10a and 11a) 
show that the calculations reproduce the signature electronic 
features of graphene: specifically, the zero bandgap (i.e., van-
ishing DOS at the Fermi level, E f) and the metallic character 
due to the topological singularities at the K-point (i.e., the Dirac 
cone of the touching valence and conductance bands). More-
over, the Fermi region (Ef ± 3 eV) is dominated by the carbon-pz 
contributions, a result of the extended π-conjugation that con-
tributes to the extraordinary in-plane electronic conductivity of 
graphene.
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 9. Schematic representation of the contact formation. a) For short 
plasma treatment times, the graphene is likely still present under the 
contact and a top contact configuration is obtained. b) Longer plasma 
treatment times likely remove most of the graphene under the metal con-
tact resulting in an edge type contact. The graphene (grey) is contacted 
to the platinum (red) via functional groups created by the plasma treat-
ment (blue).
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (9 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
The placement of a Pt-contact on top of pristine graphene 
(Figure 11a) does not distort the properties of the PG. The zero-
bandgap is maintained as well as the conical shape of the carbon 
bands around the K-point, following from the weak (physical) 
and long-range coupling between Pt and graphene.[7,53] The pres-
ence of the Pt contact, however, does result in a shift of the Dirac 
point above Ef by about 0.30 eV. This is in good agreement with 
previous DFT and micro-angle-resolved photoemission spectros-
copy (ARPES) studies.[7,53] The upshift of the Dirac point can be 
attributed to the p-type doping of graphene, where ≈0.07e (based 
on Bader charges) are transferred from the graphene to the Pt 
contact. A more evident observation of these features is provided 
by the unfolded band diagrams (Figure S8a in the Supporting 
Information). The findings highlight that, despite the good 
in-plane conductivity of PG, the conductivity between the Pt and 
PG is limited due to the weak Pt–graphene interaction and large 
coupling length. This is in agreement with the large contact 
resistance obtained for the evaporated Pt PVD reference sample  
(no H2 treatment), shown in Figure 8.
The functionalization of graphene by hydrogen and oxygen 
(Figure 10b,c) significantly alters the electronic structure 
of graphene, indicated by the opening of a bandgap for both 
adsorbate types. At the surface coverage ratio used in the models  
(C:[O/H] = 4:1), a direct bandgap is induced for both SHHG 
and GO. The bandgap is located at the Γ-point, amounting to 
3.61 and 1.69 eV for free-standing hydrogenated and oxygen-
ated graphenes, respectively. The predicted bandgaps for SSGH 
and GO are in good agreement with previous reports. [71,72,54]  
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 10. DFT/vdW-DF2 level orbital-projected density of states (DOS) per atom of free-standing and Pt(111)-contacted a) pristine graphene (PG), 
b) graphene oxide (GO), and c) hydrogenated graphene (SSHG). The model systems used are depicted in the inset of each graph (Pt: light gray, C: 
dark gray, H: white, O: red). The Fermi level of each system is set to zero (dashed vertical line). Each of the DOS curves is averaged over all atoms 
contributing to the individual DOS plot (e.g., C, O, and/or H, see legends for actual compositions). The gray shaded areas show the sum of contribu-
tions from the individual atomic orbital types.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (10 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
A comparison of the DOS plots of SSHG and GO with PG also 
reveals notable changes in the overall orbital composition and 
structure. In the case of isolated GO, the oxygen pxy orbitals 
dominate the energy levels encompassing the Fermi level 
(Ef ± 3 eV), suppressing the carbon p xy and, more importantly, 
the carbon p z contributions. In contrast to GO, the carbon  
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
Figure 11. DFT/vdW-DF2 level orbital-projected band structures along the M-Γ-K-M high-symmetry path of (left) free-standing and (right) Pt(111)-
top-contacted a) pristine graphene (PG), b) graphene oxide (GO), and c) hydrogenated graphene (SSHG). The corresponding partial DOS per atom 
are also plotted. The energy levels (eV) are shifted by the Fermi energy (E f , dashed horizontal lines) and only energies within 3 eV of Ef  are depicted. 
The DOS and band diagrams are LM-decomposed to show individual orbital contributions from selected atom types. Specific orbital contributions are 
depicted by colored beads (s: red; pxy: green; p z: blue; others: gray). The size of the beads indicates the weight of corresponding Bloch eigenstate of 
a given orbital. For the Pt-contacted graphene samples, contributions from Pt atoms are given by pale solid lines (for clarity) and labeled as “others.” 
The model systems used for band diagrams can be found in the insets of Figure 10.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (11 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.de
pz character is more pronounced in electronic structure of SSHG, 
like its PG counterpart. Yet, unlike PG, the carbon p xy orbitals 
also play a key role in the DOS of SSHG in this energy regime, 
likely due to the sp 3 hybridization of carbon atoms. Similarly, 
the band structure of SSHG in the Fermi region (Figure 11b) 
shows that the valence and conduction bands have more C pz 
character than C p xy. The top of the valence band of GO on 
the other hand is mainly of p xy character, contributed by both 
carbon and oxygen atoms (see Figure S8b in the Supporting 
Information for the atomic projections). The mitigated C pz 
character (and resulting distorted π-conjugation) predicted in 
the Fermi region of isolated GO and SSHG is the likely reason 
for their reduced (in-plane) charge carrier mobilities compared 
to PG, a common feature for functionalized graphenes. [31,33]
Top/surface contacting of functionalized graphene (GO and 
SSHG) with Pt gives rise to a more prominent change in the 
electronic structure, as compared to contacting PG (Figure 10). 
The large bandgaps of the free-standing GO and SSHG both 
vanish when contacted with Pt, while at the same time the band 
features are distorted (Figure 11). From the DOS and band 
structures, one can determine that n-type doping is induced 
(i.e., Ef is upshifted) for both GO and SSHG upon contacting 
with Pt. This in contrast to the p-type doping observed for PG. 
Even though the Pt–d orbitals now dominate the Fermi region 
(Figure 11; Figure S9 in the Supporting Information), the 
overall composition of the main atomic orbital contributions 
from the graphene C and O/H atoms remains qualitatively 
unaltered, when compared to their isolated graphene counter -
parts. In detail, GO has primarily a p xy character (contributed 
mainly by O-p xy orbitals and by C-p xy orbitals) in the valence 
band, whereas the C and O pz orbitals dominate the conduction 
band. Besides, the C–Pt interactions are chemically shielded by 
the presence of oxygen. By contrast, SSHG displays an even-
stronger pz character (from the carbon atoms) when contacted 
with Pt, whereas its p xy states are suppressed. The H–s orbitals 
have only a minor contribution to the DOS of SSHG, and a 
reduced shielding of the C–Pt interactions is expected, com-
pared to GO. The unfolded band diagrams (Figure S11 in the 
Supporting Information) further confirm these predictions.
The substantial change in electronic properties of func-
tionalized graphene points at the stronger bonded (covalent/
ionic) interactions of graphene with the Pt through the func-
tional groups, unlike the PG case where the weaker nonbonded 
(vdW) interactions govern the transmission efficiencies. DFT /
local-density approximation (LDA) minimum structures reveal 
that bonded interactions enable shorter Pt–graphene coupling 
lengths for GO (with minimum O–Pt distances of ≈2.30 Å) and 
SSHG (H–Pt: 1.86 Å) as compared to PG (C–Pt: ≈3.33 Å). The 
less compact coupling of Pt–GO than Pt–SSHG can be attrib-
uted to the larger vdW radius of oxygen. Besides, Bader analysis 
of partial charges suggests that Pt contact donates a charge 
of ≈0.50e to GO, whereas only a 0.17e transfer is expected 
for SSHG. Larger charge transfer for GO hints at a stronger 
interaction of GO with Pt than SSHG and PG with Pt. This 
is further supported by the predicted GO/Pt binding energy 
of 104 meV per atom, whereas that of SSHG is significantly 
weaker (ΔEb = 77 meV per atom), but still stronger than that of 
PG (ΔEb = 35 meV per atom). These findings suggest that the Pt 
wetting efficiency can be ordered as follows: GO > SSHG > PG.  
This is in line with the quicker Pt film closure observed in 
Figure 5 for the O2 plasma treated graphene compared to the 
H2-treated and pristine graphene, respectively.
To analyze the effect of contact type (top/surface vs edge/
side, see Figure 9) on the nature of Pt–graphene interaction, two 
models comprising PG and SSHG edge-contacted to Pt(111) 
were investigated (Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). 
GO was not analyzed because a prolonged O2 plasma treat-
ment (unlike H 2) renders the graphene amorphous before an 
edge-contact could be formed. The resulting partial DOS plots 
(Figure 12) reveal the major changes in charge carrier transport 
means for both PG and SSHG depending on the junction type. 
As already discussed, in a conventional top/surface contact 
the coupling of Pt and pristine graphene is achieved through 
C-pz and Pt–d orbitals and the coupling length is large due to 
stable π-bonds. Likewise, out-of-plane C-pz Pt–d interactions are 
still the key factor for carrier transmittance in a SSHG–Pt top 
contact, with additional pathways introduced by the H–s Pt–s 
interactions. By contrast, for the high transmission efficien-
cies in edge-contacted junctions, the p π and p σ orbitals play 
an equivalently important role besides the shorter coupling 
lengths.[55] From Figure 12, it becomes evident that the C-p xy 
orbitals have the highest DOS contributions near E f for both 
edge-contacted PG and SSHG. These orbitals couple well with 
the Pt-pxy (alongside Pt–d) orbitals to enable in-plane conduc-
tion paths. Additionally, C–s and Pt–s interactions arise due to 
the dangling bonds at the graphene edges. The H–s orbitals in 
SSHG augment the p σ interactions compared to PG, which 
could further increase the cohesive coupling between Pt–gra-
phene and decrease the contact resistance.
The observations made above suggest that the Fermi region 
(valence and conduction bands) of SSHG is dominated by C-p z 
orbitals that are well aligned with Pt–d orbitals. Therefore, the 
in-plane conduction pathways of charge carriers are still acces-
sible for SSHG through extended π-conjugation, even when 
top-contacted with Pt. By contrast, GO has a stronger interac-
tion with the Pt contact mainly through the Pt–d and O-p xy 
orbitals and to a smaller extent the p z, which activates the out-
of-plane conduction modes rather than in-plane ones. This 
enhances the major carrier conduction along the dipole formed 
across the Pt–GO junction, but limits the conduction along the 
channel. Since a high-quality metal–graphene contact requires 
both a good in-plane and out-of-plane conductivity SSHG would 
be a better choice for a top-contact configuration, as it pro-
vides a good balance between the two conduction modes. The 
improved contact resistances observed for H 2 plasma treated 
graphene compared to O 2 plasma treated graphene (Figure 8) 
agree well with this observation.
In case of an edge-type contact configuration, the contact-
channel transmission/conduction pathways are governed by 
π-bond (C-p xy with Pt-p xy and Pt–d orbitals) as well as σ-bond 
(C–s with Pt–s) interactions. Besides, a good conduction along 
the graphene channel is provided by the intact π-conjugation 
system (formed by C-p z orbitals). The enhanced interactions 
at the edge-like Pt/graphene interface, compared to a top-
contact, increase the transmission efficiencies and decrease 
the contact resistances (in line with previous reports). [12,55] 
Besides, the SSHG is predicted to provide even stronger con-
tact–channel interactions (thus lower contact resistances) than 
Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (12 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.deAdv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
PG, due to the involvement of additional H–s and Pt–s orbital 
interactions. This is in agreement with the experimental 
observation in Figure 8 that the lowest contact resistance is 
obtained when almost all the graphene under the Pt contacts 
is removed and an edge-like contact is formed after a pro-
longed plasma exposure.
3. Conclusions
To conclude, Pt–graphene contacts were created by a com-
bination of plasma functionalization and ALD. The O2 and  
H2 plasma functionalization of graphene served two purposes. 
First, the formation of functional groups on the graphene 
during plasma exposure created adsorption sites for the Pt ALD 
precursor molecules, allowing for uniform ALD of Pt on gra-
phene. Additionally, the created functional groups improved 
the Pt–graphene interaction, which reduced the contact resist-
ance between the Pt and the graphene.
The devices created using a H 2 plasma treatment performed 
considerably better (3× lower contact resistance) than the ones 
created using an O2 plasma treatment. This points in the direc-
tion that C H groups created by the H 2 plasma contribute to 
more efficient charge transfer pathways than the C O groups 
created by the O 2 plasma. The improved performance of the  
H2 plasma functionalized devices was expounded on by the DFT 
calculations, which indicated that the presence of hydrogen con-
taining functionalities on graphene leaves the dominating C-pz 
character (π-conjugation) of graphene largely intact. Compared 
to pristine graphene, the out-of-plane charge transfer improves 
through the additional Pt–H interactions alongside shorter cou-
pling lengths. This brings about a good balance between the 
in-plane and out-of-plane conductivity for H2 plasma treated gra-
phene. The O2 plasma treatment also improved the out-of-plane 
interactions due to additional Pt–O orbital interactions. How-
ever, the in-plane conduction along the channel is interrupted 
by the oxygen atoms, whose orbitals dominate the valence and 
conduction bands rather than those of carbon, leading to a good 
out-of-plane conduction but severely degrades the in-plane con-
duction. Additionally, the amorphization of graphene as a result 
of the O2 plasma treatment could play an unfavorable role.
The best contact resistance (0.4 ± 0.2 and 1.2 ± 0.1 kΩ µm for 
the H 2 and O 2 plasma treatments, respectively) was obtained 
when almost all graphene under the contacts was removed 
and likely an edge-contact was created. Compared to reference 
devices created by EBL, evaporation, and plasma functionaliza-
Figure 12. GGA/vdW-DF2 level atom-projected DOS of PG and SSHG that are a) edge-contacted or b) top-contacted to Pt metal. Insets show the 
models used for the calculations. Contributions by atomic orbitals of C, H, and Pt are given by diverse colors. Pt–d orbital contributions are not shown 
for clarity. See Figure 8 caption for other details.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (13 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.deAdv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
tion, the ALD created Pt–graphene contacts resulted in a lower 
contact resistance. The enhanced performance of the ALD cre-
ated contacts was attributed to the absence of a Ti-adhesion 
layer, as was required for the reference devices.
The obtained results show that plasma functionalization in 
combination with ALD is a promising method for the creation 
of high-quality metal graphene contacts. The use of H 2 plasma 
treatments to reduce the contact resistance is of particular 
interest, as they can be readily integrated in contact fabrication 
processes that use other contact metals and/or contact deposi-
tion techniques.
4. Experimental Section
Graphene Growth: Large-area graphene was grown on Cu foil (Alfa 
Aesar 99.8, No 13382) by chemical vapor deposition. The Cu foil was 
cleaned before growth in acetone and methanol followed by a 1.0 m 
HNO 3  etch in 30 s to remove the surface oxide. After rinsing in DI water, 
the Cu foil was dried and loaded into a tube furnace. The graphene was 
grown by a two-step process. First, the Cu foil was heated to 1050 °C 
and annealed in an Ar/H 2  flow (500/10 sccm) at a pressure of 0.4 Torr. 
After 30 min, the H 2  flow was reduced to 6 sccm, and 100 sccm CH 4  was 
added to the gas flow, resulting in monolayer graphene coverage after 
20 min. The sample was cooled down to room temperature in 15 min 
while leaving the gas flows on.
Graphene Transfer: Following growth, the graphene was transferred to 
90 nm SiO 2 /Si (100) substrates using PMMA A4 950k (Micro Chem.) 
as a support layer. Ammonium persulfate ((NH 4 )2 S 2 O 8  0.1 m) was used 
to etch the Cu. After transfer, the PMMA was removed using acetone 
followed by a final rinse in methanol. Finally, the samples were annealed 
at 400 °C in an Ar/H2  atmosphere for 2 h, to minimize any PMMA 
residue remaining on the graphene surface after PMMA lift-off.
Graphene Functionalization: Graphene functionalization was 
performed by H 2  and O 2  plasma treatments in an Oxford Instruments 
FlexAL reactor using a 100 W, 50 mTorr plasma at 50 °C. The base 
pressure of the system was <1 × 10 −6  Torr. The creation of functional 
groups was monitored by a Renishaw Invia Raman microscope 
(514.5 nm) and Thermo Scientific K-Alpha KA 1066 XPS.
Pt Atomic Layer Deposition: To investigate the effect of the 
functionalization on the Pt coverage after ALD, 500 cycles of Pt ALD 
were performed on the plasma treated graphene samples. As a reference 
also, a pristine graphene sample was added. The ALD process consisted 
of a MeCpPtMe3  precursor dose and an O 2  reaction step, separated by 
pump steps, at a temperature of 300 °C. Additional details on the Pt 
ALD process can be found elsewhere.[37,56]  After ALD, the Pt coverage on 
graphene was analyzed by a JEOL 7500 FA SEM.
Device Fabrication: To evaluate the properties of the Pt–graphene, 
contacts CTLM structures, consisting of rings with an inner diameter 
of 100 µm and outer diameter ranging between 110 and 200 µm, were 
created by photolithography of photosensitive polyimide. Polyimide acts 
as a blocking layer during Pt ALD, preventing MeCpPtMe3  precursor 
adsorption where polyimide is present. This makes it possible to 
selectively deposit the Pt on graphene. Further details on the polyimide 
lithography process can be found elsewhere.[37]  For the created CTLM 
structures, H 2  and O 2  plasma treatments were performed after polyimide 
lithography, to prevent damage to the graphene channel. No Pt 
deposition occurred on the polyimide when it was treated with a plasma, 
indicating that the selectivity of the Pt ALD process was not affected. 
After plasma functionalization, 1000 cycles of Pt ALD were performed at 
300 °C. This resulted in a Pt thickness of ≈36 nm on the plasma treated 
graphene. The thickness was determined by EDX spectroscopy with an 
EDAX UMSII EDX spectrometer. More details on the AS-ALD process 
can be found elsewhere.[37]
Reference CTLM structures were created by EBL using PMMA as the 
resist material. The patterning was done in a Raith EBPG5150 system, 
with a 100 kV e-beam and a beam current of 100 nA. The required 
patterning dose ranged between 750 and 900 µC cm −2 , depending on 
the pattern dimensions. For some samples, H 2  plasma treatments were 
performed after the EBL patterning to functionalize the graphene. For 
the contacts, 35 nm of Pt was evaporated by a Temescal FC2000 e-beam 
evaporator, to prevent contact delamination a 1 nm Ti adhesion layer 
was used.
Device Characterization: The CTLM structures were analyzed using a 
Janis micromanipulated vacuum probe station with a Keithley 4200-SCS 
parameter analyzer. The samples were annealed overnight at 475 K in 
vacuum (≈10−4  mbar) to reduce the ambient doping of the graphene 
and improve measurement reproducibility. Measurements were carried 
out in a two-probe configuration at room temperature under vacuum, a 
minimum of 6 devices (for 9 different channel lengths) were measured 
per sample.
Computational Methods: The orbital-projected DOS and band 
diagrams of PG, GO, and SSHG with and without Pt contacts were 
determined by DFT. The DFT calculations were performed using the 
projector augmented wavefunction[57,58]  method as implemented in 
Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP v.5.4.1). [59–62]  LDA [61]  was 
utilized in view of its capability to predict the graphene electronic and 
structural properties on different substrates.[7,8,63,64]  To account for 
the dispersion effects (e.g., van der Waals interactions), the van der 
Waals density functional (vdW-DF2)[65,66]  was used in combination 
with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA). [67,68]  The vdW-DF2  
is expected to give a better description of the dispersion effects by 
considering nonlocal additions to the exchange correlation functional. 
In view of the detailed comparison of two functionals (see Section 2 
in the Supporting Information), LDA was used for structures and  
vdW-DF2 for DOS and band diagrams. DFT with different functionals 
was commonly employed for probing the electronic and structural 
properties of pristine and functionalized graphene, either isolated or on 
a metal substrate.[69–75]
The electronic DOS and band diagrams of graphene analogues were 
predicted using a collection of periodic models consisting of PG, GO 
with a linear epoxy-group decoration and SSHG with a honeycomb 
decoration model (see Figure S7 in the Supporting Information). In 
addition to the free-standing (isolated) graphene derivatives, their 
interfaces to the top/surface or side/edge Pt–metal contacts were also 
considered for the DFT calculations. For simulating the contacts, two Pt 
models, namely 4-layer Pt(111) and Pt(220)-rocksalt-like, were employed 
alongside the graphene models. However, only the Pt(111) results are 
included here for brevity (see Section 2 in the Supporting Information 
for a detailed discussion). To augment the understanding of the complex 
band structures of the graphene–Pt junctions/contacts, the BandUP 
method by Medeiros et al. was used. This approach unfolds the bands 
of a given supercell onto one of its available primitive cells.[69,70]  The 
Bader charge partition scheme [76]  was employed for estimating the 
charge transfer from the graphene to Pt. A dipole correction scheme 
was also considered, as implemented in VASP,[77]  along with the spin-
polarization formalism. Further computational details and a discussion 
on the selection of the model systems can be found in Section 2 in the 
Supporting Information.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available online from the Wiley Online Library 
or from the author.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank C. O. van Bommel, C. A. A. van Helvoirt, 
J. J. L. M. Meulendijks and J. J. A. Zeebregts for technical assistance. 
Dr. P. V. C. Medeiros and Dr. J. R. Nelson are acknowledged for their 
fruitful discussions on the electronic structure calculations. This work 
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (14 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.deAdv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
is part of the research program of the Foundation for Fundamental 
Research on Matter (FOM, Grant No. FOM12PR3101), which is part 
of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO). The 
manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors 
have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
atomic layer deposition, devices, graphene, Pt
Received: February 15, 2018
Revised: March 20, 2018
Published online: May 2, 2018
[1] F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 487.
[2] Y . Wu, K. A. Jenkins, A. Valdes-Garcia, D. B. Farmer, Y . Zhu, 
A. A. Bol, C. Dimitrakopoulos, W. Zhu, F. Xia, P. Avouris, Y .-M. Lin, 
Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3062.
[3] F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y . Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, P. Avouris, Nat. Nano-
technol. 2009, 4, 839.
[4] K. Nagashio, T. Nishimura, K. Kita, A. Toriumi, in 2009 IEEE Int. Electron 
Devices Meet., IEEE, Piscataway, New Jersey, US  2009, pp. 1–4.
[5] F. Xia, V. Perebeinos, Y . Lin, Y . Wu, P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011, 6, 179.
[6] T. Moriyama, K. Nagashio, T. Nishimura, A. Toriumi, J. Appl. Phys. 
2013, 114, 24503.
[7] G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks,  
V. M. Karpan, J. van den Brink, P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101, 
26803.
[8] P. A. Khomyakov, G. Giovannetti, P. C. Rusu, G. Brocks, 
J. van den Brink, P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 195425.
[9] F. A. Chaves, D. Jiménez, A. W. Cummings, S. Roche, J. Appl. Phys. 
2014, 115, 164513.
[10] L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y . Huang, Q. Gao, Y . Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, 
K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, 
K. L. Shepard, C. R. Dean, Science 2013, 342, 614.
[11] T. Chu, Z. Chen, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 3584.
[12] D. W. Yue, C. H. Ra, X. C. Liu, D. Y . Lee, W. J. Yoo, Nanoscale 2015, 
7, 825.
[13] R. Ifuku, K. Nagashio, T. Nishimura, A. Toriumi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2013, 103, 33514.
[14] A. Nath, A. D. Koehler, G. G. Jernigan, V. D. Wheeler, J. K. Hite, 
S. C. Hernández, Z. R. Robinson, N. Y . Garces, R. L. Myers-Ward, 
C. R. Eddy, D. K. Gaskill, M. V. Rao, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104, 
224102.
[15] C. A. Chavarin, A. A. Sagade, D. Neumaier, G. Bacher, W. Mertin, 
Appl. Phys. A 2016, 122, 58.
[16] S. M. Song, B. J. Cho, Carbon Lett. 2013, 14, 162.
[17] N. F. W. Thissen, R. H. J. Vervuurt, A. J. M. Mackus, J. J. L. Mulders, 
J.-W. Weber, W. M. M. Kessels, A. A. Bol, 2D Mater. 2017, 4, 25046.
[18] A. J. M. Mackus, N. F. W. Thissen, J. J. L. Mulders, 
P. H. F. Trompenaars, Z. Chen, W. M. M. Kessels, A. A. Bol, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 110, 13101.
[19] B. Karasulu, R. H. J. Vervuurt, W. M. M. Kessels, A. A. Bol, Nanoscale 
2016, 8, 19829.
[20] K. Kim, H.-B.-R. Lee, R. W. Johnson, J. T. Tanskanen, N. Liu, 
M.-G. Kim, C. Pang, C. Ahn, S. F. Bent, Z. Bao, Nat. Commun. 2014, 
5, 4781.
[21] X. Wang, S. M. Tabakman, H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 
8152.
[22] K. S. Park, S. Kim, H. Kim, D. Kwon, Y .-E. Koo Lee, S.-W. Min, S. Im, 
H. J. Choi, S. Lim, H. Shin, S. M. Koo, M. M. Sung, Nanoscale 2015, 
7, 17702.
[23] N. Y . Garces, V. D. Wheeler, D. K. Gaskill, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: 
Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom. 2012, 30, 
30801.
[24] C. Marichy, N. Pinna, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2013, 257, 3232.
[25] J. Kim, S. Jandhyala, Thin Solid Films 2013, 546, 85.
[26] R. H. J. Vervuurt, W. M. M. E. Kessels, A. A. Bol, Adv. Mater. Inter-
faces 2017, 1700232, 1700232.
[27] B. Lee, G. Mordi, M. J. Kim, Y . J. Chabal, E. M. Vogel, R. M. Wallace, 
K. J. Cho, L. Colombo, J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 43107.
[28] S. Jandhyala, G. Mordi, B. Lee, G. Lee, C. Floresca, P.-R. Cha, 
J. Ahn, R. M. Wallace, Y . J. Chabal, M. J. Kim, L. Colombo, K. Cho, 
J. Kim, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 2722.
[29] O. M. Nayfeh, T. Marr, M. Dubey, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2011, 
32, 473.
[30] T. Lim, D. Kim, S. Ju, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 13107.
[31] R. H. J. Vervuurt, B. Karasulu, M. A. Verheijen, W. (Erwin) 
M. M. Kessels, A. A. Bol, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 2090.
[32] J. A. Robinson, M. LaBella, M. Zhu, M. Hollander, R. Kasarda, 
Z. Hughes, K. Trumbull, R. Cavalero, D. Snyder, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2011, 98, 53103.
[33] B. M. Foley, S. C. Hernández, J. C. Duda, J. T. Robinson, 
S. G. Walton, P. E. Hopkins, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 4876.
[34] B. Ma, C. Gong, Y . Wen, R. Chen, K. Cho, B. Shan, J. Appl. Phys. 
2014, 115, 183708.
[35] N. Cheng, S. Stambula, D. Wang, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, A. Riese, 
B. Xiao, R. Li, T.-K. Sham, L.-M. Liu, G. A. Botton, X. Sun, 
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 13638.
[36] A. B. Soliman, M. H. Hassan, T. N. Huan, A. A. Abugable, 
W. A. Elmehalmey, S. G. Karakalos, M. Tsotsalas, M. Heinle, 
M. Elbahri, M. Fontecave, M. H. Alkordi, ACS Catal. 2017, 7, 7847.
[37] R. H. J. Vervuurt, A. Sharma, Y . Jiao, W. (Erwin) M. M. Kessels, 
A. A. Bol, Nanotechnology 2016, 27, 405302.
[38] J. Schwan, S. Ulrich, V. Batori, H. Ehrhardt, S. R. P. Silva, 
J. Appl. Phys. 1996, 80, 440.
[39] A. C. Ferrari, D. M. Basko, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 235.
[40] A. Eckmann, A. Felten, A. Mishchenko, L. Britnell, R. Krupke, 
K. S. Novoselov, C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3925.
[41] Y .-C. Lin, C.-C. Lu, C.-H. Yeh, C. Jin, K. Suenaga, P.-W. Chiu, Nano 
Lett. 2012, 12, 414.
[42] S. M. Geyer, R. Methaapanon, R. Johnson, S. Brennan, M. F. Toney, 
B. Clemens, S. Bent, J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 116, 064905.
[43] W. Zhu, T. Low, V. Perebeinos, A. a Bol, Y . Zhu, H. Yan, J. Tersoff, 
P. Avouris, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3431.
[44] E. Färm, M. Kemell, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 
112, 15791.
[45] D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, 
M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, 
A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Science 2009, 323, 610.
[46] Z. Luo, T. Yu, K. Kim, Z. Ni, Y . You, S. Lim, Z. Shen, S. Wang, J. Lin, 
ACS Nano 2009, 3, 1781.
[47] G. K. Reeves, Solid. State Electron. 1980, 23, 487.
[48] G. S. Marlow, M. B. Das, Solid. State Electron. 1982, 25, 91.
[49] M. Ahmad, B. M. Arora, Solid. State Electron. 1992, 35, 1441.
[50] J. H. Klootwijk, C. E. Timmering, in Proc. 2004 Int. Conf. Micro-
electron. Test Struct. (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37516), IEEE, 2004,  
pp. 247–252.
[51] J.-L. Li, K. N. Kudin, M. J. McAllister, R. K. Prud’homme, I. a. Aksay, 
R. Car, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 176101.
[52] J. T. Smith, A. D. Franklin, D. B. Farmer, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, 
ACS Nano 2013, 7, 3661.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


www.advancedsciencenews.com
©  2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim1800268 (15 of 15)
www.advmatinterfaces.deAdv. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800268
[53] P. Sutter, J. T. Sadowski, E. Sutter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter 
Mater. Phys. 2009, 80, 1.
[54] D. Haberer, C. E. Giusca, Y . Wang, H. Sachdev, A. V. Fedorov, 
M. Farjam, S. A. Jafari, D. V. Vyalikh, D. Usachov, X. Liu, 
U. Treske, M. Grobosch, O. Vilkov, V. K. Adamchuk, S. Irle, 
S. R. P. Silva, M. Knupfer, B. Büchner, A. Grüneis, Adv. Mater. 2011,  
23, 4497.
[55] Y . Matsuda, W.-Q. Deng, W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114, 
17845.
[56] H. C. M. Knoops, A. J. M. Mackus, M. E. Donders, M. C. M. van de 
Sanden, P. H. L. Notten, W. M. M. Kessels, Electrochem. Solid-State 
Lett. 2009, 12, G34.
[57] P. E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B 1994, 50, 17953.
[58] G. Kresse, D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59, 1758.
[59] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B 1993, 47, 558.
[60] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B 1994, 49, 14251.
[61] G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci. 1996, 6, 15.
[62] G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B 1996, 54, 11169.
[63] M. Vanin, J. J. Mortensen, A. K. Kelkkanen, J. M. Garcia-Lastra, 
K. S. Thygesen, K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 81408.
[64] E. Mostaani, N. D. Drummond, V. I. Fal’Ko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 
115, 1.
[65] J. Klimeš, D. R. Bowler, A. Michaelides, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 
2010, 22, 22201.
[66] K. Lee, É. D. Murray, L. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist, D. C. Langreth, 
Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2010, 82, 3.
[67] P. Hohenberg, W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 1964, 136, B864.
[68] W. Kohn, L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 1965, 140, A1133.
[69] P. V. C. Medeiros, S. S. Tsirkin, S. Stafstrom, J. Bjork, Phys. Rev. B: 
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2015, 91, 1.
[70] P. V. C. Medeiros, S. Stafström, J. Björk, Phys. Rev. B: Con-
dens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2014, 89, 041407.
[71] A. Nourbakhsh, M. Cantoro, A. V. Klekachev, G. Pourtois, T. Vosch, 
J. Hofkens, M. H. van der Veen, M. M. Heyns, S. De Gendt, 
B. F. Sels, J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 16619.
[72] A. Nourbakhsh, M. Cantoro, T. Vosch, G. Pourtois, F. Clemente, 
M. H. van der Veen, J. Hofkens, M. M. Heyns, S. De Gendt, 
B. F. Sels, Nanotechnology 2010, 21, 435203.
[73] Q. Wang, R. Pang, X. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 22534.
[74] K.-A. Min, S. Hong, Curr. Appl. Phys. 2015, 15, S103.
[75] H. Gao, L. Wang, J. Zhao, F. Ding, J. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 3236.
[76] W. Tang, E. Sanville, G. Henkelman, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2009, 
21, 84204.
[77] J. Neugebauer, M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B 1992, 46, 16067.
 21967350, 2018, 13, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/admi.201800268 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
