Multiscale Modeling of the Atomic Layer Deposition of
HfO2 Thin Film Grown on Silicon: How to Deal with a
Kinetic Monte Carlo Procedure
A. Dkhissi,* A. Este`ve, C. Mastail, S. Olivier, G. Mazaleyrat, L. Jeloaica, and
M. Djafari Rouhani
Laboratoire d’Analyse et d’Architecture des Syste`mes-CNRS, Uni Versity of Toulouse,
7a Venue du Colonel Roche, 31077 Toulouse, France
Received April 09, 2008
Abstract: An original integrated approach developed within a multiscale strategy, which
combines ﬁrst-principles quantum simulations and kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC), is presented to
investigate the atomic layer deposition (ALD) of HfO2 on Si(100) surface. Density functional
theory within the hybrid functional is used to determine the detailed physicochemical mechanisms
and associated energetics of the two half cycles taking place during the initial stage of ﬁlm
growth. A kinetic Monte Carlo model is then proposed that deals with the stochastic nature of
the calculated DFT mechanisms and barriers. Beyond the chemical information emanating from
DFT calculations, the lattice-based KMC approach requires preliminary physical considerations
issued from the crystal structures that the system is intended to adopt. This is especially critical
in the case of heterogeneous systems like oxides deposited on silicon. We also describe (i)
how atomistic conﬁguration changes are performed as a result of local events consisting in
elementary reaction mechanisms occurring on speciﬁc lattice sites, (ii) the temporal dynamics,
governed by transition probabilities, calculated for every event from DFT activation barriers,
and (iii) the relation of KMC with the ALD experimental procedure. Some preliminary validation
results of the whole multiscale strategy are given for illustration and pertinence with regard of
the technological main issues.
1. Introduction
In the electronic ﬁeld, SiO2 has been the gate dielectric of
choice for MOS devices for several decades because of its
ability to grow on silicon, its thermal stability, and its low
level of defect density at the interface, resulting in excellent
electrical properties of the devices. Unfortunately, the
reduction of the SiO2 gate oxide thickness in agreement with
Moore’s law has led to unacceptable tunnelling and leakage
current levels.1 So, the conventional SiO2 gate reaches its
physical and electrical limitations. An intense effort to ﬁnd
a replacement for SiO2 as the gate dielectric for future MOS
electronics has been under way for several years. For this
purpose, the importance of high-k gate dielectrics has been
well demonstrated.2 Indeed, in addition to showing a high
dielectric constant, a potential high- k replacement must
satisfy many stringent requirements, such as the high quality
of the interface, a desired band alignment with silicon, and
a large electronic gap. At present, the leading materials are
Al2O3, HfO2, and ZrO2 oxides, considered as the ﬁrst high-k
generation candidates to meet these criteria and replace SiO2.
For MOS applications, HfO2 is attractive because it exhibits
a bulk permittivity of almost 25, a wide band gap (5.68 eV),
and a good thermodynamic stability in contact with silicon.3
However, the growth of a SiO2 interfacial layer between
HfO2 and the silicon substrate leads to an increase of the
experimental EOT (equivalent oxide thickness) of the gate
stack.
Among various methods for growing high-k dielectric
ﬁlms, atomic layer deposition (ALD) show a unique ability
to deposit ultra thin ﬁlms with excellent conformity and
uniformity over large areas.4 ALD, which is a vapor
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail:
adkissi@laas.fr.
J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2008, 4, 1915–1927 1915
10.1021/ct8001249 CCC: $40.75  2008 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 10/15/2008
Downloaded via LEIBNIZ UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER on December 6, 2024 at 13:06:23 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


deposition technique, is based on the cycling of self-
terminating surface reactions. Indeed, each precursor is
pulsed into the reaction chamber alternately, and the reaction
between the incoming precursors and surface species is self-
terminating. Thus atomic-level control of ﬁlm growth is
supposed to be achieved. Experimentally, ALD has been
actively investigated for deposition of HfO2
5-21 for which
HfCl4 and H2O are often used as precursors.22-24 In practice,
the quantity of metal atoms deposited per cycle depends on
the temperature, on the chemical nature of the precursors
used, and related reactive sites on the surface. For instance,
Ritala et al. found that only a submonolayer of the HfO2
ﬁlm is deposited during each cycle.22 Therefore, a detailed
understanding of the basic mechanisms that take place during
each cycle is required if one wants to optimize the deposition
and to reach full monolayer coverage at each cycle. This is
especially true for the few ﬁrst deposited layers whose
quality, in terms of interface defects, is of major importance
for subsequent electrical properties. In recent studies, some
groups have investigated speciﬁc problems of ALD of hafnia
ﬁlms, their structural, optical, and electrical characteristics.25-28
They show that diffusion and solid-state reactions at the
substrate-ﬁlm interface may inﬂuence the ﬁlm material and
create or modify an interface layer between the ﬁlm and
substrate.29 On silicon substrates, these reactions could result
in undesirable formation of defects, silicate or silicide layers,
which may further signiﬁcantly deteriorate the properties of
the dielectric layer.29-32 Others issues, such as contamination
effects resulting from the uncontrolled precursor decomposi-
tion, are observed. In particular, chlorine contamination has
been asserted and well documented on ﬁlms grown with
HfCl4 precursors.20,33-35 It is of great importance for optimal
future experimental setups that a precise atomic level
description of the basic reaction mechanisms responsible for
the overall process of high-k ﬁlm growth and also that their
relation with the thermodynamic parameters be established.
In this respect, the decomposition of HfCl4 on the substrate
and further hydrolysis of the resulting surface complex, that
is, SiO2-O-HfCl3 should be thoroughly investigated. Mean-
while, today’s state-of-the-art theoretical methods can play
a decisive role in reduction of the expensive experimental
efforts needed for screening large numbers of candidate
materials and associated process parameters. Theoretical
approaches can speed up the selection of suitable gate
dielectrics and growth methods by limiting the experimental
input needed. For these reasons, a detailed understanding of
the basic mechanisms that take place during each cycle of
ALD has been the subject of intensive research effort by
several theoretical groups using ﬁrst principles, especially
via density functional theory.35-51 In our group, we have
considered the ab initio study of the initial stage of the ALD
as being essential for the complete understanding and the
control of the growth of the high-k (Al2O3, ZrO2, and HfO2)
ﬁlms for gate dielectrics applications.49-51 Our ﬁnal aim is
to achieve the ambitious task of elaborating a new generation
of tools dedicated to atomic scale simulation of technological
process, for an optimization of experimental setups. Here,
our strategy is to combine the ab initio level of calculations
with kinetic Monte-Carlo techniques into a multiscale
approach, which will incorporate enough reaction mecha-
nisms to be ready for being tested against experimental
setups. Rigorously, molecular dynamics should be a suitable
tool to address atomic scale process simulation. However,
microelectronic processes deal with mesoscopic structures,
several millions of atoms, and cover timescales beyond
seconds or minutes. Molecular dynamics is then limited for
two major reasons: (i) interatomic potentials have to be
generated, which is a particularly difﬁcult task in the frame
of heterostructures and interfaces, and (ii) timescales are
limited to nanoseconds of experimental duration. Thus kinetic
Monte Carlo (KMC) is an alternative procedure that is of
great help in the modeling of microelectronic processes: a
lattice-based model makes it possible to avoid the detailed
description of continuous atomic trajectories, and the kinetics
of the sequence of events is explicitly treated and can meet
typical process durations. While traditional thermodynamic
and kinetic models deal with average physical quantities,
kinetic Monte Carlo is able to consider a wide range of
possible conﬁgurations at the atomic scale and to choose only
one random path out of all possible ones. This corresponds
to an actual (ALD) experiment. The path is determined
according to random numbers sampled according to transition
probabilities between conﬁgurations. Obviously, the transi-
tion probabilities depend also on the local conﬁguration,
activation barriers and on the ﬁlm deposition conditions, such
as pressure and temperature. Moreover the role of each
mechanistic step on an ensemble of interacting species makes
it feasible to uncover process-dependent types of growth,
kinetics, and their associated atomic arrangements. The
present paper is dedicated to the description of the prelimi-
nary version of our KMC tool enabling the treatment of HfO2
ALD from HfCl4 and H2O precursors at the atomic scale. In
the following, we will focus our attention on the basic
ingredients needed to develop what we call a lattice-based
KMC model. We will deﬁne a lattice framework able to
represent the transition from the silicon diamond structure
to the HfO2 crystalline structure. Then we introduce the
concept of basic atomistic mechanisms and show how they
can be derived from ab initio calculations. We will ﬁnally
present the temporal dynamics rules of our model before
showing validation and applications.
2. Theoretical Approaches
2.1. Ab Initio DFT. The calculations are performed
within the framework of Kohn-Sham density functional
theory. Speciﬁcally, we used the hybrid functional B3-LYP,
which combines Becke’s three-parameter exchange func-
tional (B3)52 with Lee-Yang-Parr gradient corrected cor-
relation functional (LYP).53 All the atoms are described by
a triple-/dzetavalence plus polarization (TZVP) functions. For
Hf atoms, we used the ecp-60-mwb energy-consistent
pseudopotentials given by the Stuttgart-Dresden-Bonn
(SDB) group.54-56
The surface is built according to the following procedure.
It is modeled by a cluster that includes a dimer unit of the
2× 1 reconstructed Si(100) surface having each of its Si
dangling bonds passivated by an H atom. Only the ﬁrst Si
1916 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


layer atoms are left free during the relaxation. The second-,
third-, and fourth-layer atoms, including the H terminations,
are held ﬁxed in their bulk tetrahedral positions. This type
of constraint will avoid unrealistic relaxations of the surface
model during the optimization procedure. The unconstrained
part of the cluster was then oxidized by ﬁve oxygen atoms
placed in the Si-Si bonds closest to the surface. Therefore,
subsequent relaxations were performed after each newly
arrived O atom was embedded. The result is 1-dimer
peroxide-like57,58 model for Si(100)/SiO2
-2 × 1 surface. Of
the two remaining dangling bonds on the dimer, one is
hydroxylated and the other hydrogenated. One then obtains
a 28-atom optimized structure with a ﬁnal stoichiometry of
Si9O6H13. The calculations are performed with Turbo -
mole5.559 and Gaussian03.60
2.2. Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC).KMC is a stochastic-
based model aimed at simulation of ﬁlm growth at the atomic
scale, the ﬁnal objective being to furnish alternative/new tools
for replacement of the macroscopic conventional TCAD tools
used for years by engineers in microelectronics. Indeed, from
the engineering point of view, the main interest is in the
microstructure that is produced under speciﬁc processing
conditions. Such a model performs virtually the explicit
experimental processing procedure event after event, at the
atomic scale. This is operated through probabilistic rules that
make the overall simulation comparable with an actual
experiment.61,62 It involves millions of atoms with a time
duration longer than the second. Unfortunately, the most
predictive models, that is, the quantum-based models are not
tractable at this scale. Two options can be further considered:
molecular dynamics (MD) and kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC).
MD solves the Newton equation of motion for each atom in
the system. Trajectories are continuous and necessitate very
short integration time steps that make the simulation cumber-
some for durations beyond the nanosecond. Another draw-
back of the MD method is the general lack of adequate
interatomic potential for highly disordered and heterogeneous
systems. This is particularly true for microelectronics
semiconductor/oxide interfaces such as silicon/high-k gate
oxides. KMC appears to be a simpliﬁcation compared with
MD: MD continuous trajectories are replaced with discrete
atomic jumps. A prior knowledge of these hoppings is needed
and must be listed from any other source: quantum-based
models or experimental characterization. Thus, provided the
characteristics of reaction pathways are known, KMC
methods allow the simulation of more ambitious systems in
terms of size and duration of the simulated experiment,
meeting the requirements of the next generation of processes
in microelectronics. Also, the lattice-based KMC, because
of its induced structural simpliﬁcation, makes it easier to
process the data concerning the atomic arrangement as a
function of the implemented basic mechanisms. This con-
trasts with the difﬁculty in dealing with structural aspects in
MD, where complex statistical methods have to be employed.
Basic ingredients needed to develop what we call a lattice-
based KMC model are detailed as follows: (i) we ﬁrst deﬁne
a lattice framework able to operate the desired transition
between the silicon crystal and the oxide structure; (ii) we
then characterize each conﬁguration with the aim of as-
sociating each lattice site to the chemical nature of the species
occupying the site; (iii) we introduce the concept of events
that must describe correctly the chemistry of the basic
mechanisms; (iv) we ﬁnally indicate how to deal with the
time evolution in the KMC, namely, the temporal dynamics
of the KMC.
2.2.1. One Crystal Lattice Model. 2.2.1.1. Lattice
Description. In contrast to molecular dynamics, where atoms
are moving continuously in space, the lattice-based procedure
developed in this KMC software allows a very efﬁcient
treatment of atomic displacements: the atoms discretely move
from predeﬁned sites to other sites according to transition
probabilities. Obviously, this schematic picture is motivated
by physicochemical considerations through the knowledge
of the basic mechanisms and the investigation of lattice
structure. This last point becomes crucial in the case of
heterogeneous systems, where at least two different crystal-
lographic structures are being considered. This is the case
in our study, where metallic oxides are grown on an ultrathin
silicon oxide, itself grown or deposited on a silicon substrate.
First, a reliable and systematic way of representing the atom
locations is needed. Then, the implementation of conﬁgura-
tions makes the connection between a location and its
chemical nature: for instance, a site may be unoccupied or
occupied by Si, Hf, etc.We point out that this lattice picture
gives the possibility of making schematic and comprehensive
graphical views of the system and therefore of performing a
simple analysis of the results that does not require complex
post-processing of the data. In this description, where an atom
is represented in its network site, its real location is implicitly
somewhere around this particular site.
2.1.1.2. Modeling of the Atomic Conﬁguration. We now
describe the construction of a model in charge of representing
the atomic conﬁguration of a Si/SiO2/HfO2 system of sites.
Beyond the crystalline aspects, we will introduce tools able
to take into account the molecular states: precursors, sub-
stituents, contaminants, etc. The management of the neigh-
bors will also be investigated. Attention will ﬁnally be given
to the modeling of the substrate and its connection with the
introduced crystalline model. Overall crystallinity is deﬁned
when Hf and oxygen atoms are located in the predeﬁne lattice
sites. In this case, Hf may be fully or under-coordinated
depending on the occupancy of the oxygen lattice sites
around. When densiﬁcation occurs, rearrangement of oxygen
atoms should induce an increase of the coordination number.
a. Crystallographic Considerations. A preliminary crys-
tallographic study is essential in close connection with the
construction of the atomic conﬁguration. In our case, the
system is heterogeneous: “high-k” oxide on silicon with an
ultrathin silica interface. Moreover, the basic species are
molecular precursors whose mechanisms of decomposition
prove to be complex and poorly understood. It is thus
necessary to develop a system of location able to represent
simultaneously various crystalline structures containing vari-
ous elements. Moreover, further reﬁnements will be neces-
sary to take account of several subtleties, such as molecular
states, substituents, and contaminants, in opposition to
crystalline states. First of all, it is advisable to know the
crystallography of the HfO2 oxide. Hafnia exists under
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1917


different crystallographic structures. At low temperature,
HfO2 has a monoclinic phase. When the temperature is
increased, it transforms into the tetragonal phase and then
into the cubic phase. Experimental evidence of crystalline
grains for thick oxide or post-annealed ﬁlms has been
established. However, the structure close to interface, that
is, the oxide structure near the silicon/silicon dioxide, is not
known. Therefore, to correctly model this interface, one has
to make a coincidence lattice site study. For us, it then
appears judicious to consider the (100) face of the cubic
phase of hafnia: it matches efﬁciently the (100) silicon
surface structure, is geometrically easier to describe, and does
not contradict or hinder the experimental results. Thus, the
overall idea consists of building the model of location via a
single cubic structure, keeping in mind that the real positions
of atoms are “somewhere around” these arbitrary crystalline
positions. The substrate will be a Si(100) surface function-
alized by hydroxyl groups, which are known to be the active
surface sites with regard to the precursor gas phase.63
b. Two-Dimensional Basic Cell. To characterize the sites
in our KMC, we have to deﬁne a two-dimensional cell where
there should not be any ambiguity between atom species and
locations. For that, we superimpose the conventional cubic
cell of oxide and silicon-based SiO2 (100) surface and try to
ﬁnd an agreement between their crystallographic parameters.
The silicon surface structure is taken as the crystal reference,
an ultrathin silicon dioxide being able, in this view, to
accommodate perfectly with this structure. We obtain the
hypothetical conﬁguration represented in Figure 1. This
resulting picture leads to the best agreement between the
different cells. The silicon substrate is represented by two
atomic layers to know the orientation of the bonds in the
higher layers. In Figure 1, siloxane bridges and hydroxyl
functions are represented just as an indication. This surface
representation is very schematic: in particular, we do not
show the dimer formation inducing Si-O-Si species,
although they are taken into account in the calculations.
Silicon atoms are schematically located at the nodes of the
diamond lattice, without taking account of displacements
usually observed. According to the crystallographic tables,64
the distance separating two Si surface atoms is 3.84 Å. If
one then considers that the cubic cell parameter of hafnia
oxide is 5.04 Å, the distance separating two neighboring Hf
atom is 3.57 Å. It thus appears possible to accommodate
the two structures, thanks to the coincidence between Si(100)
and Hf(100), with a tension of the cubic hafnia that can be
assimilated to an intrinsic strain at the interface level of the.
In more detail, how do Hf positions compare to those of Si?
The answer that we formulated is illustrated in Figure 1.
Let us imagine now that we deposit several HfO2 cubes
in tension, as seen previously, on the substrate, with an ideal
agreement of the cells. We see that a tilt of the cell is required
to obtain a complete matching of the atoms. It is then possible
to completely cover the surface without defect. It is, to some
extent, what we would like to obtain in real experiments,
the defects resulting from the kinetic process and the
stochastic nature of the growth. Figure 2 is a top view of
this ideal conﬁguration where the various species are
represented by symbols for a better legibility. We thus have
a (100) surface of silicon atoms, covered by single-crystal
HfO2 in its cubic phase. The square base of a conventional
cubic cell is represented in dotted line. Five hafnium atoms
are located in the second layer (k ) 2): the four corners of
the square and the central atom (gray round symbols). On
the monolayer above (k ) 3), we ﬁnd four hafnium atoms
corresponding to the centers of the four side faces (gray
square symbols). The ﬁrst four oxygen atoms (gray round
symbols on dotted line) are situated between these two layers
(k ) 2 + 1/2). By addition of two new layers, one of oxygen
atoms (gray round symbols on the dotted line atk ) 3 +
1/2) and one of hafnium atoms (gray round symbols atk )
4), one obtains the totality of the conventional cube. This
cube is obviously not the primitive cell, minimal for the
construction of a crystal. The primitive cell, which we
consider to be the unit cell, is represented in thick dotted
lines and is found by observation of Figure 2 globally.
According to altitude, or more exactly to the layer indexk,
one meets various species, placed at various positions of this
cell. For thek ) 1 layer, we have a silicon placed on a
Figure 1. Cubic cell of hafnia deposited on the Si/SiO 2
substrate functionalized with hydroxyl groups.
Figure 2.Top view of ideal conﬁguration. Several HfO2 cubes
are deposited on the substrate with an ideal agreement of
cell. A two-dimensional cell is identiﬁed where there should
not be any ambiguity between atom species and locations.
1918 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


triangle. For the even layers, a hafnium will be placed on a
gray round symbol, and for the odd layers (exceptk ) 1),
hafnium will be located on a dark gray square. Between two
layers of hafnium, we ﬁnd two oxygen atoms placed on the
gray round dotted lines (for clarity, they are represented only
in the conventional cell). This primitive cell thus makes it
possible to represent in an exhaustive way an HfO2 crystal,
in its cubic phase, on a (100) silicon surface. It contains preset
sites that are able to accommodate the various atoms that
compose the system, while placing them at the adequate
position.
c. Atomic Conﬁgurations. Through the lattice description,
we built a grid to help us to locate the atoms. Now we must
formalize the possible chemical nature of species occupying
these sites. Thus, the conﬁguration, that is, the site occupation
nature, should characterize the local atomic arrangement
within the site. We introduce a data-processing structure that
will take account not only the crystalline conﬁguration but
also the chemical functions, the various contaminants, and
the molecular groupings with their substituent. Each element
of grid will thus contain several ﬁelds of occupation. For
the metal element, it is provided in molecular form in the
precursor, is then incorporated as an adsorbed molecule, and
ﬁnally, is stabilized in the crystalline state. Therefore, the
ﬁeld of metal occupation can be empty (value 0), be occupied
by a molecular hafnium (value 1), or occupied by a
crystalline hafnium (value 2). A crystalline state corresponds
to the case where a hafnium is located somewhere around a
preset site, while being based on the cubic cell of dense
oxide. On the other hand, in its molecular state, the Hf atom
is attached to the substrate by only one connection, that is,
a treelike structure, after physisorption or chemisorption of
the precursor molecule. It is advisable to distinguish these
two states because their reactivities will be, without any
doubt, different because one Hf-OH or Hf-Cl dangling
bond transforms into Hf -O-Si-substrate (Sub) tightly
bound to the substrate. As an example, Figure 3 presents
one such molecule, a chemically absorbed grouping, having
three Cl substituents attached. The substituents have their
own ﬁelds of occupation: one for Cl and one for OH. The
values of these two ﬁelds can reach 4; their sum has to remain
lower than 4 to respect the coordination number of hafnium
atoms in their covalent environment. For the crystalline
oxygen atoms considered in the construction of the elemen-
tary cell, two ﬁelds of Oa and Ob sites are identiﬁed. They
can be empty or occupied. Let us recall that these oxygen
atoms are of crystalline type and do not have to be confused
with those of hydroxyls or the groupings, O-Hf, which are
considered as molecular.
These oxygen crystalline sites can be occupied after what
we will call “densiﬁcation” mechanisms, described later in
Section 3.1.3.The reaction mechanisms presented in the
following section predict a possible contamination by HCl,
a byproduct issued from precursor chemisorption. This led
us to introduce a ﬁeld of occupation HCl to account for its
presence near a hafnium center, crystalline or not. By
convention, for the hydrolysis phase, adsorbed water will
be represented by the value 3 in the metal ﬁeld of occupation.
Each element of our table of atomic conﬁguration will thus
be a structure containing several ﬁelds of occupation (metal,
Cl, OH, Oa,O b, HCl) and being able to take various values.
This occupancy table will play a major role during the
execution of the software: in permanent evolution, it will be
questioned and in turn modiﬁed very frequently until the ﬁnal
conﬁguration is obtained. The use of grid indices, preset sites
within a basic cell and ﬁelds of occupation will allow a
faithful representation of the system, while guaranteeing a
light and fast data-processing, authorizing an exploration on
a mesoscopic scale.
d. Neighborhood. To determine, in an efﬁcient way, if a
chemical reaction is possible or not within the crystal, it is
necessary to know the state of occupation of neighboring
cells in the grid. Therefore, it is very important to know
precisely the neighbors of a given site. We deﬁne 12
neighbors per lattice site, taking periodic boundary conditions
into account.
e. Substrate Modeling. Figure 4 shows connection be-
tween the atomic model of network based conﬁguration and
a hydroxylated Si/SiO2 (100) substrate, by the superposition
of the chart of the system and the symbols of the network
based model (Si-H are not represented). It is seen here that
the silicon atoms take the places that are reserved for them
(triangles) with internal displacements, in particular, on the
level of dimers, being neglected. Siloxanes and hydroxyls
are distributed according to options described previously. One
notes that preset sites are empty, “on standby” for the arrival
Figure 3. Noncrystalline -O-HfCl3 groups chemisorbed on
the hydroxylated Si/SiO2. This is the KMC model structure
 Figure 4. Connection between the atomic model of conﬁg-
uration and the substrate.
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1919


of a hafnium or an oxygen. These crystalline positions will
be occupied through molecular transient states, as considered
in the ﬁelds of occupation of the table of conﬁgurations.
2.2.1.3. Mechanisms and E Vents. To avoid confusion, we
need to deﬁne what we mean by “reaction step” and by KMC
“event”. A reaction step is an elementary or single chemical
reaction. An event is related to the Monte Carlo procedure;
it stands for a mechanism that occurs at a particular time on
a well-determined site within the grid.
a. Mechanism Deﬁnition. The elementary reaction steps
that constitutes the basis of any KMC approach can emanate
from literature data, ab initio calculations, or a KMC
investigation itself (in particular cases where the code is ready
for validation procedures). As an example, Figure 5 illustrates
precursor chemisorption, followed by HCl desorption. The
calculated activation energies, using ab initio DFT, can serve
as preliminary input values for the kinetic Monte Carlo
mechanisms. The results of ab initio calculations are sum-
marized in Section 3.1. Further, ALD growth is complicated
by other reaction steps, not just the precursor molecule’s
adsorption and hydrolysis. An example is the densiﬁcation
(Table 1). Indeed, a key technological question that arises
during the ﬁlm growth is the necessary phase transition of
the interesting materials from their molecular structure in
the gas-phase precursors to their solid-state structure in the
deposited ﬁlm. This is particularly true for metallic com-
pounds, such as oxides (HfO2), where the metal has a
covalent bonding structure in the precursor, with a small
coordination number, while the metal oxides have mainly
ionic structures with large coordination numbers. However,
the complexity of the densiﬁcation process is such that our
present KMC implementation includes no changes in Hf or
O coordination number. Further, because of the intrinsic
difﬁculty in consideration of reaction steps related to these
phenomena, the set up of a DFT modeling strategy becomes
tricky. Later on in the paper, densiﬁcation will be clariﬁed,
and we will show how this problem can be overcome in the
KMC.
b. E Vents Filtering and Modiﬁed Probability Sites. Let
us begin with an example, the precursor arrival mechanism.
Obviously, there are lots of precursor arrival events, onto
every surface site. But, at a given time, not all these events
are possible. They must be ﬁltered, or in other words,
authorized or forbidden. The authorized events list is updated
at each system conﬁguration change. Moreover, if one given
event is forbidden and becomes authorized, its “speciﬁc time”
is also updated (see Section 2.2.1.2b for details about this
point). In contrast, if the event is authorized and remains
authorized, its “speciﬁc time” is kept as is. In any other case,
the forbidden event’s “speciﬁc time” is set to a value greater
than the overall experiment duration. If not reauthorized
again, this event will never occur. To save computing time,
the ﬁltering procedure is only called when necessary by a
“smart call” routine, Figure 6. Another way to save comput-
ing time is to consider modiﬁed probability sites (MPS). In
this procedure, after the occurrence of a given event, one
considers only a local reactualization of the sites/events/time
of occurrence. Rigorously, all the sites/events could be
reactualized, which would require a huge amount of comput-
ing time. This procedure is thus used on the basis of the
Figure 5. Initial reaction path way and associated barriers
in the case of HfCl4 based precursor ALD on SiO2/Si.
Table 1. List of Mechanisms Considered in the KMC
Simulations, with Their Main Characteristics, As Described
in the Text
DFT investigation KMC investigation a
01 HfCl4 adsorption 09 Dens. Inter_CI_1N_cOH-iOH (all k)
02 H2O adsorption 10 Dens. Inter_CI_1N_cOH-iCl (all k)
03 HfCl4 Desorption 11 Dens. Inter_CI_1N_cCl-iOH (all k)
04 HCl incorporation 12 Dens. Inter_CI_2N_cOH-iOH (all k except 2)
05 H2O Desorption 13 Dens. Inter_CI_2N_cOH-iCl (all k except 2)
06 H2O incorporation 14 Dens. Inter_CI_2N_cCl-iOH (allk except 2)
07 back reaction 15 Dens. Intra_CI_1N_cOH-iOH ( k ) 2)
08 HCl Desorption 16 Dens. Intra_CI_1N_cOH-iCl ( k ) 2)
17 Dens. Intra_CI_1N_cCl-iOH (k ) 2)
18 Dens. Intra_CC_1N_cOH-cOH (k ) 2)
19 Dens. Intra_CC_1N_cOH-cCl (k ) 2)
20 Dens. Intra_CC_2N_cOH-cOH (k ) 2)
21 Dens. Intra_CC_2N_cOH-cCl (k ) 2)
22 Dens. Bridge_TI_2N_tOH-iOH (k ) 2)
23 Dens. Bridge_TI_2N_tOH-iCl (k ) 2)
24 Dens. Bridge_TI_2N_tCl-iOH (k ) 2)
25 Dens. Bridge_TI_3N_tOH-iOH (k ) 2)
26 Dens. Bridge_TI_3N_tOH-iCl (k ) 2)
27 Dens. Bridge_TI_3N_tCl-iOH (k ) 2)
28 Dens. Bridge_TC_3N_tOH-cOH (k ) 2)
29 Dens. Bridge_TC_3N_tOH-cCl (k ) 2)
30 Dens. Bridge_TC_3N_tCl-cOH (k ) 2)
31 Dens. Bridge_TC_4N_tOH-cOH
32 Dens. Bridge_TC_4N_tOH-cCl
33 Dens. Bridge_TC_4N_tCl-cOH
34 Dens. Bridge_TT_3N_tOH-tOH (k ) 2)
35 Dens. Bridge_TT_3N_tOH-tCl (k ) 2)
36 Dens. Bridge_TT_4N_tOH-tOH
37 Dens. Bridge_TT_4N_tOH-tCl
38 Dens. Bridge_TT_5N_tOH-tOH
39 Dens. Bridge_TT_5N_tOH-tCl
a Densiﬁcations may result from reactions between Cl or OH
terminals in ionic (i), cluster (c), or tree (t) conﬁgurations.
Figure 6. Kinetic Monte Carlo cycle.
1920 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


concept that an event has a limited impact in space and that
domains far from the occurring event do not see it.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Ab Initio Results. To date, almost all ab initio
investigations have focused on the chemistry of possible
reactions, during both precursor and water exposures of the
ALD of HfO2. These predictive methods, cluster or periodic
based-DFT, are particularly suitable for chemical mecha-
nisms that are difﬁcult to reach by experiment or other
modeling strategies.
Here, the reactions between the gaseous precursors HfCl4
or H2O with the hydroxylated SiO2 surface are predicted to
proceed via an exchange mechanism65,66 and can be sepa-
rated into two half reactions. The ﬁrst half-cycle reaction
(1) takes place during the initial step of atomic layer
deposition of HfO2, that is, the decomposition of HfCl4
precursor molecules, followed by a purge
|SiO2-OH + HfCl4 f| SiO2-O-HfCl3 + HCl (1)
The second half cycle (2) is exposure to water molecules
and is also followed, in practice, by a purge period.
|SiO2-O-Hf(OH)3-x-Clx + H2O f
SiO2-O-Hf(OH)4-x-Clx-l + HCl (2)
where x has values of 1-3.
First, we give the results of the ﬁrst half-cycle reaction at
the initial deposition step. The second task is dedicated to
the second half reaction. We present results and compare
them with those related to ZrO2. Data from the literature
are also discussed. However, the basic mechanisms that are
given in the following are crucial to understand the results
all along the multiscale procedure up to the KMC/experiment
relation. All basic mechanisms have been introduced in the
KMC and are activated all along the ALD process duration,
except chemisorptions of water and precursor from gas-phase
exposure that are limited to speciﬁc semicycles. Their
desorptions, reactions, and backreactions are possible through
all cycles. Their occurrence will depend on the computed
activation energies.
3.1.1. Precursor/Surface Reaction: O VerView of
Existing Results. Geometrical structures and energetic
diagram of the total system along the decomposition
reaction pathways of HfCl4 on the SiO 2 substrate are
presented in Figure 5. A chemisorbed state is found where
Hf/O interaction is occurring without substantial modiﬁca-
tion of the precursor integrity (0.48 eV adsorption energy).
This adsorption energy is weaker than those obtained by
Musgrave and co-workers.66 This difference is the result
of the differences in cluster geometry and basis set. Both
parameters are more extended in our study. A dissociation
path is then calculated, and we obtain an activation barrier
of 0.88 eV. This barrier is higher than the 0.7 eV barrier
obtained by Widjaja et al..68 The difference is caused by
the methodology used in the search of transition state and
the surface models that are different. Beyond the saddle
point, HCl molecule formation is observed during mini-
mization with subsequent adsorption of this molecule on
top of the dimer inserted oxygen atom. Globally, it is
expected from these results that the deposition with the
desired coverage of a complete monolayer of precursors
is a difﬁcult task. The sticking of the precursor is low.
The high activation barrier for decomposition is compared
to the precursor non dissociative chemisorption. Moreover,
the dissociative incorporation is reversible. The dissociated
precursor molecule is itself thermodynamically unstable
with respect to the chemisorbed state. This authorizes the
precursor to recombine and to be rejected from the surface.
Fortunately, the HCl byproduct desorption is fast, because
of its low activation energy of only 0.12 eV, and inhibits
further reverse reaction. These qualitative aspects will be
conﬁrmed at the KMC modeling level.
3.1.2. Hydrolysis Reaction. The second half cycle, which
introduces H2O into the reaction chamber, is intended to
regenerate the surface-OH group by reaction 2. The reaction
path and predicted energetic for the reaction of H2Oo n
|SiO2-O-HfCl3 sites are presented in Figure 7 . For
comparison, we also report, in this ﬁgure, the results of the
reaction of H2Oo n|SiO2-O-HfCl3. The energy levels are
displayed relative to initial state energy. Further, Table 2
summarizes the energetic data for the two reactions and
compares them with corresponding results obtained by
Musgrave and co-workers.67-69
The quantitative energetic of the reaction 2, shown in
Figure 8, shows some similarities between HfO2 and ZrO2.
Indeed, water molecule adsorbs onto the HfCl3 (or ZrCl3)
covalently bonded to the surface by donating a lone pair from
the oxygen atom to the empty d shell of the Hf. In the case
of HF (or Zr), the complex chemisorbed state is 0.68 eV (or
0.62 eV) more stable than the initial state. After the
adsorption of H2O, the reaction proceeds via the transition
state shown in Figure 8. In the transition state, O in H2Oi s
bonded to Hf with a bond length of 1.9 Å. The Hf -Cl
distance is increased to 3.8 Å, which indicates that the bond
is broken in the transition state. We also note that the
interaction between the O lone pair and the HCl antibonding
orbital leads to the delocalization of the lone pair electrons,
which indicates the partial breaking of the O-H bond and
the partial formation of HCl bond. The reaction is exothermic
by 0.19 eV with an activation barrier of 0.97 eV. As shown
in Table 2 and Figure 8, the second half reaction for Zr has
the same behavior as for Hf. Indeed, the saddle point energies
for the two systems are also close leading to an activation
Figure 7. Reaction path and predicted energetics for the
reactions of H 2O and SiO 2-O-HfCl3 and H 2O and
SiO2-O-ZrCl3.
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1921


barrier of 0.97 and 0.90 eV for Hf and Zr, respectively. In
comparison with the data obtained by Musgrave et al., the
choice of cluster geometry and basis set led to systematic
differences in relative energies, except that a similar barrier
is obtained by Musgrave (0.88 eV) and us (0.90 eV).
Further, on the basis of the results obtained by Musgrave
and us, the use of clusters models should be sufﬁcient to
determine the reaction mechanisms. To determine the cred-
ibility of DFT in predicting these mechanisms, Heyman et
al.35 reported the calculations (especially transition states)
on different precursors using DFT, MP2, and QCISD(T) and
concluded that both ab initio approaches resulted in the same
transition states that were found using DFT (B3LYP).
3.1.3. Densiﬁcation Mechanisms. Beyond reaction mech-
anisms appears a key issue for a better understanding of
high-k ﬁlm growth, we will call the phenomenon “densiﬁ-
cation”. In the gas phase, metallic precursors exhibit a
covalent molecular structure characterized by a small coor-
dination number, whereas the resulting deposited metallic
oxide has an ionic type of structure characterized by a large
coordination number. This necessary phase transition has
been poorly investigated to date in literature.50 In our recent
work, we show that this chemical process is mediated by
the presence of oxygen atoms: sharing them locally allows
a local redistribution of oxygen atoms and metallic centers
to operate the desired transition. This implies an increase of
the coordination of both Hf and oxygen atoms and a “more
dense” local reallocation of the atoms through the collapse
of dendritic tree like structures into densely packed oxide
ﬁlms. The dendritic structures result from an accumulation
of adsorbed molecules, preventing a dense structure by steric
hindrance. However, the complexity of the densiﬁcation
process is such that our KMC model still poorly describe
this phenomenon leading to no increase of the coordination
number.
In addition, we expect new insight from DFT calculations
in this area in the future (currently under investigation in
our team) because no such reaction pathway has been
calculated in the frame of the ALD process speciﬁcally.
3.2. Preliminary KMC Results.3.2.1. Mechanisms in
Kinetic Monte Carlo Code. The kinetic Monte Carlo code
contains all the above generic mechanisms, declined in
various cases and conﬁgurations. These are detailed in Table
1, where we distinguish between two types of mechanisms,
respectively listed in the two columns of Table 1. The ﬁrst
column contains eight mechanisms whose thermodynamic
and kinetic parameters are calculated using DFT. It contains
precursor adsorption, desorption, incorporation and back
reaction, H2O adsorption, desorption and incorporation
(hydrolysis), and HCl byproduct desorption.
The second column contains 31 (09-39) mechanisms of
densiﬁcation type whose rates are empirically adjusted by
comparison of simulation results with experimental data.
These densiﬁcation mechanisms can occur between precur-
sors situated on the same layer (intra) or different layers
(inter). They can also occur in situations where the creation
of a bridge, with overhangs left in the growing ﬁlm, is
necessary. On the other hand, densiﬁcations can occur
between neighboring sites, up to the ﬁfth neighbors. Den-
siﬁcations may also result from reactions between Cl or OH
terminals in ionic (i), cluster (c), or tree (t) conﬁgurations.
These denominations refer respectively to terminals directly
adsorbed on the ﬁlm surface (i), which are therefore in ionic
positions, to terminals on precursor molecule deposited on
the ﬁlm surface as a cluster (c), and to terminals on treelike
precursor molecules (t). These latter are molecules bonded
to an already adsorbed molecule. They allow the adsorption
of several layers of precursor molecules on the surface.
All the above information, together with the layer number
k, where the corresponding events can occur, is reported in
Table 1. In addition, in Figure 8, we give an example of
densiﬁcation mechanism.
The energetic of reactions 09-39 are set to one arbitrary
value and later ﬁtted to experiment. This will help to bring
out the importance of further modeling of these reactions.
3.2.2. Optimization of Substrate Hydroxylation. Hydroxy-
lated surfaces can be prepared using various processes70,71
that allow preparation of surfaces with different densities of
reaction sites. We thus simulate a ﬁrst ALD phase, at 300
°C, with a duration of 100 ms verusus the 50 ms duration
generally used in experiments. We have performed simula-
tions ((10× 10) atoms substrates) on ﬁve different initial
substrates containing various OH concentrations. The ﬁrst
four cases concern 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% hydroxyl
concentrations, with siloxane bridges distributed randomly;
100% coverage corresponds to one OH per surface silicon
atom. The ﬁfth case concerns the simulation of the hydroxy-
Table 2. Comparisons of Energetic (In eV) for the Si-O-M(Cl)3+ H2O( M ) Hf, Zr) and Those Obtained from Literaturea
M-Cl3-H2O complex TSb M-OHCl2-HCl complex HCl desorption
M ) HF 0.68 0.97 0.63 0.20
M ) Zr 0.62 0.90 0.69 0.09
M ) Zr (results of Musgrave, ref 68) 0.78 0.88 0.75 0.05
a The energies of M-Cl3-H2O are relative to the entrance channel. The energies of TS, M-OHCl2-HCl complex are relative to the
M-Cl3-H2O complex. The energies of HCl desorption are relative to the M-OHCl2-HCl complex. b Transition state.
Figure 8. Example of densiﬁcation mechanism: multilayer
noncrystalline/tree.
1922 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


lation process with the option “no more than one OH on
each dimer”. This process leads to 47% hydroxyl coverage.
The coverage rates (HfO2 coverage) obtained, after one
ALD cycle, are represented on the graph of Figure 9, where
we have also distinguished between the crystalline and
molecular states of Hf. Again, 100% coverage corresponds
to one Hf per surface silicon atom. The triangles in Figure
9 show the crystallinity ratio. An increase in the total
coverage is observed when one increases the number of
reactive sites on the substrate. Moreover, crystallinity follows
the same tendency: this is the result of the possibility for a
chemically absorbed precursor to bridge itself if an OH is
available in its vicinity. In the case with 100% hydroxyl
coverage of the surface, it is noted that the total coverage
amounts to approximately 55%, indicating that a majority
of hafnium atoms are thus bridged. In this case, each Hf
reacts with two OH: one for the sticking and one for the
bridging process. The bridging process can be considered
as one type of densiﬁcation mechanism because it allows
the elimination of one branch within the molecular tree
structure.
We cannot judge yet if this is realistic because the barriers
of these ﬁrst densiﬁcations are unknown, and arbitrary values
are introduced at this stage. At the end of the ﬁrst ALD cycle
performed at 300° C on a chemical silicon oxide, a total
coverage of 35% has been experimentally measured.69 This
value is in good agreement with our simulations with 50%
OH and 47% OH. These concentrations are indeed the most
probable ones when referring to the model of Zhuravlev,
dealing with the hydroxylation of SiO2 surfaces.72 In addition,
in the last case, by limiting the local OH concentrations, we
hinder the densiﬁcation mechanisms: crystallinity is 22% in
the ﬁfth case, while 38% in the second case with 50% OH.
3.2.3. Calibration of Energies of First Densiﬁcations. In
practice, densiﬁcation mechanisms in the kinetic Monte Carlo
account for all transitions from molecular state to ionic or
crystalline states, that is, the nodes of the lattice. These
include reactions between grafted molecular ligands and the
surface, such as the bridging process (eq 3) or reactions
between two grafted ligands close to each other. The
activation energies of all the mechanisms of densiﬁcation
are unknown and not well understood to date.73 We have
arbitrarily ﬁxed them at 0.5 eV for preliminary simulations.
Their values have no incidences on the coverage at low
hydroxyl concentrations and at the usual growth tempera-
tures. But, if underestimated, the coverage can decrease at
high hydroxyl concentrations. In this case, the most probable
reaction is between two ﬁrst neighbors OH, to bridge a single
Hf, as expressed in eq (3)
Si-O-HfCl3 + Si-OH fSi-O-HfCl2-O-Si + HCl
(3)
Actually, in the KMC scheme, the global bridging mecha-
nism is broken in two steps, chemisorption and densiﬁcation,
each one consuming a single OH. If the energy barriers for
the ﬁrst densiﬁcation are increased, the densiﬁcation rates
decrease, and the most probable conﬁgurations will be two
separate chemisorptions on two OH groups, without any
densiﬁcation, as in eq 4
2Si-OH + 2HfCl4 f2Si-O-HfCl3 + 2HCl (4)
The competition between eqs 3 and 4 can be quantiﬁed
by comparing KMC results with the experimental values of
the coverage.70 From these experiments, we can estimate very
roughly that with a surface covered with 90% hydroxyl, one
should obtain, after one ALD cycle on a (10× 10) atom
substrates, a HfO2 coverage of approximately 80%. This is
in total disagreement with preceding simulations. We thus
launched several simulations of the ﬁrst precursor injection
phase of ALD, performed at 300° C during 200 ms, while
varying the energy barrier for densiﬁcations between 0.3 and
1.8 eV. We should mention that in a given simulation, the
same value is applied to all the densiﬁcations. Figure 10
shows the HfO2 coverage and crystallinities obtained for
these various densiﬁcation barriers. For weak densiﬁcation
barriers, we observe a strong crystallinity, proof that a
majority of Hf atoms are bridged thanks to the great number
of hydroxyls. For higher values of densiﬁcation barriers,
chemisorption takes place, leading then to less crystallinity
but more extensive coverage. The simulation that approaches
80% of experimental measured coverage is that with a
densiﬁcation barrier of 1.5 eV. This calibration should be,
at ﬁrst sight, very approximate. The experimental criterion
translated into atomic terms is not inevitably reliable, and
all the densiﬁcations may not be equivalent. Despite these
naive considerations, the transition seen by variation of the
densiﬁcation energy appears to be abrupt, a few tenths of
Figure 9. Evolution of coverage rates (HfO2 coverage) and
crystallinity with different initial substrates.
Figure 10. Calibration of energies of the ﬁrst densiﬁcations.
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1923


an electronvolt. This suggests that the calibration of a
mechanism, or a class of mechanisms, is accessible through
KMC by confrontation to experiment.
Waiting for subsequent quantum contributions or experi-
ment investigations, we adopt this single value of 1.5 eV as
a ﬁrst approximation for all the densiﬁcation mechanisms.
We hope that it may help and shall be used as a basis for
DFT investigations, which can now allow us to distinguish
between different types of densiﬁcation mechanisms (listed
in Table 1), associated with different activation barriers, and
to determine the most efﬁcient ones. This proves that the
simulator can lend itself to a calibration on experimental data,
even in a very approximate way but still necessary to get
insights toward complex physicochemical issues.
3.2.4. Kinetics of Growth. Until now, we have validated
the basics of the method and the ﬁrst mechanisms introduced
in the KMC scheme, without exceeding the ﬁrst phase of
the ﬁrst ALD cycle. We now will try to go beyond this stage
by carrying out simulations on several ALD cycles under
standard conditions: at 300° C and 1.33 mbar pressure for
the two precursors. The phases of injection will last 50 ms,
as in experiments, and are followed bya4so f purge.
In experiments, several modes of growth are successively
observed.70,71 After the ﬁrst cycle, consuming a great number
of metal precursors, a slow transient state is established to
complete the coverage of the substrate. Then, a steady
operation starts, faster, where HfO2 is deposited on HfO2
substrate. By using atomic scale KMC, we try to reproduce
all these aspects of the kinetics of growth on (10× 10) and
(20 × 20) atoms substrates during tens of ALD cycles.
We ﬁrst launched a simulation of 10 ALD cycles, whereas
the mechanism of opening of a siloxane bridge was not yet
implemented in the software package. Indeed, it was
experimentally observed that that the opening of siloxane
bridges only took place at higher temperatures.
Figure 11 shows the evolution of the cumulated coverage
(HfO2 coverage) and the total crystallinity. We note a great
number of incorporations during the ﬁrst cycle leading to
44% coverage. This value is slightly larger than experimental
observations (35%), undoubtedly because of an overevalu-
ation of the hydroxyl concentrations given by the Zhuravlev
model72 Then, from cycle 2 to 5, the coverage saturates
gradually until a maximum of 73% is reached. Beyond cycle
5, the growth is stopped. This is caused by the inability of
the densiﬁcation mechanisms to be fully efﬁcient. An
examination of the ﬁnal structure indicates speciﬁc sites
where further densiﬁcation mechanisms should occur but
cannot be performed by the mechanisms already imple-
mented in our software package. We are currently consider-
ing rewriting the algorithm used to treat densiﬁcation
mechanisms to overcome this problem. The rate of crystal-
linity follows the same tendency and is stabilized around
62%, meaning that the densiﬁcation had taken place, but not
fully, because of, at least, an unsatisfactory description of
densiﬁcation. However, one cannot be satisﬁed with this
situation because the experiments show that the growth
continues, certainly slowly, after the strong coverage ob-
served after the ﬁrst cycle.70,71 An opening of the siloxane
bridges by a water molecule has been suggested that could
allow the total coverage to be reached. The opening of the
siloxane bridges is postponed during the hydrolysis phases
and could bring additional reactive sites on the initial surface.
However, no consensus exists to explain how the HfO2
coverage is reached exactly. Currently, effort is undertaken
on this subject through the improvement of the densiﬁcation
mechanisms suggested recently by DFT investigations.73
4. Conclusions
This work presents an original kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm,
developed within a multiscale strategy: from molecule-surface
interactions treated mostly at the DFT level of modeling, to
atomic scale ﬁlm growth performed via a KMC technique.
We have given details on how ab initio calculations can help
in the identiﬁcation of the relevant elementary reaction
mechanisms, before their deﬁnite implementation into the
Monte Carlo simulator that can handle millions of atoms
during seconds of simulation runs. We then show how to
develop a KMC method aimed at dealing with a promising
experimental deposition procedure: the ALD. This technique
is expected to result in a unique change in microelectronics
history by replacing traditional Si/SiO2 interface by a
deposited high-k material onto silicon. The basics of a
speciﬁc KMC have been reported, and preliminary examples
for the validation of the overall multiscale strategy are
detailed. We have shown how KMC provides a unique and
fundamental understanding of the growth mechanism and
growth kinetics of the dielectric (HfO2) onto silicon. The
relation of KMC with experiment is lighted. We have also
shown that KMC, allowing a global view of mesoscopic
structures, may shed light on shortcomings in the model. New
mechanisms can then be considered for ab initio DFT
investigations. The relevant example here has been the case
of densiﬁcation mechanisms. We hope that this work will
bring new advances for better control of the HfO2/SiO2/Si
systems and for further optimization of the processing
parameters with the aim of integrating hafnium oxide in the
heart of future generations of MOS device. Beyond this
targeted application, we believe that the development of the
Figure 11. Evolution of coverage rates (HfO2 coverage) and
crystallinity with respect to ALD cycles number. The coverage
is cumulative. The legend is the same as in Figure 10.
1924 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


KMC, detailed here, is generic and may serve other new
concepts in nano- and bionanotechnologies.
Acknowledgment. C.M. acknowledges the “Conseil
regional de la Martinique” for the funding.
Appendix
A. Temporal Dynamics.Kinetic Monte Carlo approaches
differ from static Monte Carlo techniques by the introduction
of time. Most of the Monte Carlo procedures used in
condensed matter physics are static (the Metropolis algorithm
for instance), and their interest concerns the equilibrium
structure properties. KMC is totally different in philosophy.
Here, the Monte Carlo technique is introduced for the
stochastic aspects, in connection with the time incremental
procedure, that is, it is not always the most probable event
that occurs. Different algorithms do exist for KMC. We
suggest in the following a procedure that becomes efﬁcient,
with regard of the more conventional BKL algorithm, when
dealing with many different events related to the same
mechanism, but having different probabilities. This means
that the probability depends also on the site of occurrence.
This is the case of systems where local deformation energy
is taken into account (each event has therefore a different
probability of occurrence) and where the system exhibits a
complex chemistry.
A1. Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD).The KMC soft-
ware discussed here is built to simulate the ALD experi-
mental process. ALD consists of four phases: precursor pulse,
precursor purge, hydrolysis, and water purge. Each one has
its own thermodynamic parameters and duration.. Some
mechanisms are always possible, whereas others can only
occur in a typical phase. For instance, “precursor arrival”
will obviously exist during the ﬁrst phase only. Furthermore,
the complete ALD process consists of several cycles of these
four phases.
A2. Time Management.When the software is launched,
after preliminary initializations (parameters, mechanisms,
neighborhood, conﬁguration), it makes a global scan to
determine which events are authorized and which are
forbidden. Authorized ones get a “speciﬁc occurrence time”:
this is the time that the considered event typically takes to
occur as soon as it becomes authorized. Forbidden ones get
the maximum time so that they can never occur.
The “speciﬁc occurrence time” of the eventm on site (i,
j, k) is given by
Ti,j,k,m ) -log(Z)
λm
where Z is a random number uniformly distributed between
0 and 1 andλm is the probability, per unit time, of occurrence
of the mechanism. It is expressed as
λm ) ν exp(
∆Em
kBT )
where ν is on the order of the typical lattice vibration
frequency, ∆Emis the activation energy of the mechanism,
kB the Boltzmann constant, andT the temperature. The two
arrival mechanisms (1 precursor arrival and 2 water arrival)
obey Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics of the gas phase and
have different probability expressions
λ1,2 ) CstPS
√ M1,2T
where Cst is a constant,P the pressure, S the elementary
2D-cell area,M1,2 the molar mass of the considered species,
and T the temperature. In this scheme, we have a huge list
of “speciﬁc times”, a kind of “calendar”, just as if all events
that will occur were already foreseen. Not exactly in fact,
because this calendar will often be updated as the conﬁgu-
ration evolves. As soon as the calendar is updated, the
software ﬁnds the minimum “speciﬁc occurrence time” and
the corresponding event occurs. After this minimum time
has passed, it is withdrawn from the other times contained
in the “calendar”. Then, the conﬁguration is edited and the
pertinent events (that are likely to become authorized) are
ﬁltered. We then go back to the ﬁrst KMC stage where the
minimum time is searched.
References
(1) Packan, P. A.Science. 1999, 285, 2079.
(2) Wilk, G. D.; Wallace, R. M.; Anthony, J. M.J. Appl. Phys.
2001, 89, 5243.
(3) Wilk, G. D.; Muller, D. A.Appl. Phys. Lett 2003, 83, 3984.
(4) (a) George, S. M.; OTT, A. W.; Klaus, J. W.J. Phys. Chem.
1996, 100, 13121. (b) Xu, Z.; Houssa, M.; Gendt, S. D.;
Heyns, M. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 80, 1975.
(5) Ferrari, S.; Scarel, G.; Wiemer, C.; Fanciulli, M.J. Appl. Phys.
2002, 92, 7675.
(6) Park, H. B.; Cho, M. J.; Park, J.; Lee, S. W.; Hwang, C. S.;
Kim, J. P.; Lee, J. H.; Lee, N. I.; Kang, H. K.; Lee, J. C.; Oh,
S. J.J. Appl. Phys. 2003, 94, 3641.
(7) Kawahara, T.; Torii, K.IEICE Trans. Elect. 2004, E87C (1),
2–8.
(8) Ganem, J. J.; Trimaille, I.; Vickridge, I. C.; Blin, D.; Martin,
F. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 2004, 219,
856.
(9) Green, M. L.; Ho, M. Y.; Busch, B.; Wilk, G. D.; Sorsch, T.;
Conard, T.; Brijs, B.; Vandervorst, W.; Raisanen, P. I.; Muller,
D.; Bude, M.; Grazul, J.J. Appl. Phys. 2002, 92, 7168.
(10) Triyoso, D. H.; Hegde, R. I.; Grant, J.; Fejes, P.; Liu, R.;
Roan, D.; Ramon, M.; Werho, D.; Rai, R.; La, L. B.; Baker,
J.; Garza, C.; Guenther, T.; White, B. E.; Tobin, P. J.J Vac.
Sci. Technol. B. 2003, 22, 2121.
(11) Rittersma, Z. M.; Roozeboom, F.; Verheijen, M. A.; van
Berkum, J. G. M.; Dao, T.; Snijders, J. H. M.; Vainonen-
Ahlgren, E.; Tois, E.; Tuominen, M.; Haukka, S.J. Electro-
chem. Soc. 2004, 151, 716.
(12) Chang, H. S.; Hwang, H.; Cho, M. H.; Moon, D. W.Appl.
Phys. Let. 2005, 86, 031906.
(13) Triyoso, D. H.; Ramon, M.; Hegde, R. I.; Roan, D.; Garcia,
R.; Baker, J.; Wang, X. D.; Fejes, P.; White, B. E.; Tobin,
P. J.J. Electrochem. Soc. 2005, 152, 203.
(14) Cho, M.; Park, H. B.; Park, J.; Lee, S. W.; Hwang, C. S.;
Jeong, J.; Kang, H. S.; Kim, Y. W.J. Electrochem. Soc.2005,
152, F49.
(15) Kukli, K.; Aaltonen, T.; Aarik, J.; Lu, J.; Ritala, M.; Ferrari,
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1925


S.; Harsta, A.; Leskela, M.J. Electrochem. Soc. 2005, 152,
F75.
(16) Triyoso, D. H.; Hegde, R. I.; White, B. E.; Tobin, P. J.J. Appl.
Phys. 2005, 97, 124107.
(17) Hellin, D.; Delabie, A.; Puurunen, R. L.; Beaven, P.; Conard,
T.; Brijs, B.; De Gendt, S.; Vinckier, C.Anal. Sci. 2005, 21,
845.
(18) Kirsch, P. D.; Quevedo-Lopez; MA; Li, H. J.; Senzaki, Y.;
Peterson, J. J.; Song, S. C.; Krishnan, S. A.; Moumen, N.;
Barnett, J.; Bersuker, G.; Hung, P. Y.; Lee, B. H.; Lafford,
T.; Wang, Q.; Gay, D.; Ekerdt, J. G.J. Appl. Phys. 2006,
99, 023508.
(19) Park, I. S.; Lee, T.; Choi, D. K.; Ahn, J.J. Korean Phys.
Soc. 2006, 49, S544.
(20) Cho, M. J.; Degraeve, R.; Pourtois, G.; Delabie, A.; Ragnars-
son, L. A.; Kauerauf, T.; Groeseneken, G.; De Gendt, S.;
Heyns, M.; Hwang, C. S.IEEE Trans. Electron De Vices
2007, 54, 752.
(21) Nyns, L.; Hall, L.; Conard, T.; Delabie, A.; Deweerd, W.;
Heyns, M.; Van Elshocht, S.; Van Hoornick, N.; Vinckier,
C.; De Gendt, S.J. Electrochem. Soc. 2006, 153, F205.
(22) Ritala, M.; Leskela, M.; Niinisto, L.; Prohaska, T.; Friedbacher,
G.; Grasserbauer, M.Thin Solid Films 1994, 250, 72.
(23) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kiisler, A. A.; Uustare, T.; Sammelselg,
V. Thin. Solid Films 1999, 340, 110.
(24) Kukli, K.; Ihanus, J.; Ritala, M.; Leskela, M.Appl. Phys. Lett.
1996, 68, 3737.
(25) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kiisler, A. A.; et al.Thin Solid Films
1999, 340, 110.
(26) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Mandar, H.J. Cryst. Growth 2000, 220,
105.
(27) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kikas, A.Appl. Surf. Sci. 2004, 230,
292.
(28) Kukli, K.; Aarik, J.; Uustare, T.Thin Solid Films 2005, 479,
1.
(29) de Almeida, R. M. C.; Baumvol, I. J. R.Surf. Sci. Rep. 2003,
49,1 .
(30) Wallace, R. M.; Wilk, G. D.Crit. ReV. Solid State Mater.
Sci. 2003, 28, 231.
(31) Wang, D.; Wang, Q.; Javey, A.Appl. Phys. Lett. 2003, 83,
2432.
(32) Wong, H.; Iwai, H.Microelectron. Eng. 2006, 83, 1867.
(33) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Sammelselg, V.; Siimon, H.; Uustare, T.
J. Cryst. Growth 1996, 169, 496.
(34) Puurunen, R. L.Chem. Vap. Deposition. 2005, 11, 79.
(35) Heyman, A.; Musgrave, C. B.J. Phys. Chem. B. 2004, 108,
5718.
(36) Samantaray, C. B.; Sim, H.; Hwang, H.Appl. Surf. Sci.2005,
242, 121.
(37) Elliott, S. D.; Pinto, H. P.J. Electroceram. 2004, 13, 117.
(38) Samantaray, C. B.; Sim, H.; Hwang, H.Appl. Surf. Sci.2004,
239, 101.
(39) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Musgrave, C. B. App. Phys. Lett.
2007, 90, 173120.
(40) Forst, C. J.; Blochl, P. E.; Schwarz, K.Comput. Mater. Sci.
2003, 27, 70.
(41) Kawamoto, A.; Cho, K. J.; Dutton, R. J. Comput.-Aided
Mater. Des. 2001, 8, 39.
(42) Musgrave, C. B.; Han, J. H.; Gordon, R. G.Abstr. Pap. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2003, 226, U386.
(43) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Sanz, J. F.; Musgrave, C. B.; Han,
J. H.; Gordon, R. G.J. Phys. Chem. C. 2007, 26, 9203.
(44) Ganem, J. J.; Trimaille, I.; Vickridge, I. C.; Blin, D.; Martin,
F. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 2004, 219,
856.
(45) Mui, C.; Musgrave, C. B.J. Phys Chem. B.2004, 108, 15150.
(46) Xu, Y.; Musgrave, C. B.Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 192110.
(47) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Musgrave, C. B.Chem. Phys. Lett.
2006, 421, 215.
(48) Ren, J.; Zhang, Y. T.; Zhang, D. W.THEOCHEM 2007, 803,
23.
(49) Jeloaica, L.; Esteve, A.; Djafari Rouhani, M.; Esteve, D.Appl.
Phys. Lett. 2003, 83, 542.
(50) Esteve, A.; Jeloiaca, L.; Mazaleyrat, G.; Dkhissi, A.; Djafari
Rouhani, M.; Ali Messaoud, S.; Fazouan, N.MRS Bull. 2003,
786, 35.
(51) Jeloaica, L.; Esteve, A.; Dkhissi, A.; Djafari Rouhani, M.
Comput. Mater. Sci. 2005, 33, 2005.
(52) Becke, A. D.J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 98, 5648.
(53) Lee, C.; Yang, W.; Parr, R. G.Phys. ReV.B 1988, 37, 785.
(54) Bergner, A.; Dolg, M.; Kuechle, W.; Stoll, H.; Preuss, H.Mol.
Phys. 1993, 80, 1431.
(55) Schaefer, A.; Horn, H.; Ahlrichs, R.J. Chem. Phys. 1992,
97, 2571.
(56) Schaefer, A.; Huber, C. F.; Ahlrichs, R.J. Chem. Phys. 1994,
100, 5829.
(57) Weldon, M.; Stefanov, B. B.; Raghavachari, K.; Chabal, Y. I.
Phys. ReV. Lett. 1997, 79, 2851.
(58) Helgaker, T. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1991, 182, 503.
(59) (a) Ahlrichs, R.; Ba¨r, M.; Ha¨ser, M.; Horn, H.; Ko¨lmel, C.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 1989, 162, 165. (b) Scha¨fer, A.; Horn,
H.; Ahlrichs, R.J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 97, 2571. (c) Scha¨fer,
A.; Huber, C.; Ahlrichs, R.J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 100, 5829.
(60) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.;
Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, J. R.; Zakrzewski, V. G.; Mont-
gomery, J. A.; Stratmann, R. E.; Burant, J.; Dapprich, S.;
Millam, J. M.; Daniels, A. D.; Kudin, K. N.; Strain, M. C.;
Farkas, O.; Tomasi, J.; Barone, V.; Cossi, M.; Cammi, R.;
Mennucci, B.; Pomelli, C.; Adamo, C.; Clifford, S.; Ochterski,
J.; Petersson, G. A.; Ayala, P. Y.; Cui, Q.; Morokuma, K.;
Salvador, P.; Dannenberg, J. J.; Malick, D. K.; Rabuck, A. D.;
Raghavachari, K.; Foresman, J. B.; Cioslowski, J.; Ortiz,
J. V. B., A. G.; Stefanov, B. B.; Liu, G.; Liashenko, A.;
Piskorz, P.; Komaromi, I.; Gomperts, R.; Martin, R. L.; Fox,
D. J.; Keith, T.; Al-Laham, M. A.; Peng, C. Y.; Nanayakkara,
A.; Challacombe, M.; Gill, P. M. W.; Johnson, B. G.; Chen,
W.; Wong, M. W.; Andres, J. L.; Gonzalez, C.; Head-Gordon,
M.; Replogle, E. S.; Pople, J. A.;Gaussian 03, revision D.02;
Gaussian,Inc.: Wallingford CT, 2004.
(61) Kotrla, M. Comput. Phys. Commun. 1996, 97, 82.
(62) Smilauer, P.; Vvedensky, D. D. Phys. Re V.B . 1995, 52,
14263.
(63) Schoﬁeld, W. C. E.; McGettrick, J. D.; Badyal, J. P. S.J.
Phys. Chem.B. 2006, 110, 17161.
1926 J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 Dkhissi et al.


(64) Wyckoff, R., Ed.Crystal Structure; John Wiley & Sons: New
York, 1965; Vol. 1, p 231.
(65) Ritala, M.; Leskela, N. inHandbook of Thin Film Materials ;
Nalwa, H. S., Ed.; Academic Press: New York, 2001; Vol. 1, p 57.
(66) Rahtu, A.; Ritala, M.J. Mater. Chem. 2002, 12, 1484.
(67) Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C. B.J. Chem. Phys.2002, 117, 1931.
(68) Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C. B.Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 81, 304.
(69) Han, J. H.; Gao, G.; Widjaja, Y.; Garfunkel, E.; Musgrave,
C. B. Surf. Sci. 2004, 550, 199.
(70) Blin, D. PhD thesis, University of Montpellier, 2003.
(71) Renault, O.; Samour, D.; Rouchon, D.; Holliger, Ph.; Papon,
A. M.; Blin, D.; Marthon, S.Thin Solid Films 2003, 428,
190.
(72) Zuravlov, L. T.Colloids Surf. A 2000, 173,1 .
(73) Olivier, S.; Ducere, J. M.; Mastail, C.; Esteve, A.; Landa, G.;
Djafari Rouhani, M.Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 1555.
CT8001249
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 Thin Film J. Chem. Theory Comput., Vol. 4, No. 11, 2008 1927
