Effects of gap size, temperature and pumping pressure on the ﬂuid
dynamics and chemical kinetics of in-line spatial atomic layer deposition
of Al2O3
Dongqing Pana, Tien-Chien Jenb, Chris Yuana,⇑
a Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA
b Department of Mechanical Engineering Science, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park 2006, South Africa
article info
Article history:
Received 30 July 2015
Received in revised form 29 November 2015
Accepted 11 January 2016
Available online 25 January 2016
Keywords:
In-line spatial ALD
Gap size
Temperature
Pumping pressure
Fluid dynamics
Chemical kinetics
abstract
Low throughput is a major limitation for industrial level atomic layer deposition (ALD) applications.
Spatial ALD is regarded as a promising solution to this issue. With numerical simulations, this paper stud-
ies an in-line spatial ALD reactor by investigating the effects of gap size, temperature, and pumping pres-
sure on the ﬂow and surface chemical deposition processes in Al2O3 ALD. The precursor intermixing is a
critical issue in spatial ALD system design, and it is highly dependent on the ﬂow and material distribu-
tions. By numerical studies, it’s found that bigger gap, e.g., 2 mm, results in less precursor intermixing,
but generates slightly lower saturated deposition rate. Wafer temperature is shown as a signiﬁcant factor
in both ﬂow and surface deposition processes. Higher temperature accelerates the diffusive mass trans-
port, which largely contributes to the precursor intermixing. On the other hand, higher temperature
increases ﬁlm deposition rate. Well-maintained pumping pressure is beneﬁcial to decrease the precursor
intermixing level, while its effect on the chemical process is shown very weak. It is revealed that the time
scale of in-line spatial ALD cycle is in tens of milliseconds, i.e.,/C24 15 ms. Considering that the in-line spatial
ALD is a continuous process without purging step, the ALD cycle time is greatly shortened, and the overall
throughput is shown as high as/C24 4 nm/s, compared to several nm/min in traditional ALD.
/C2112016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is an approved nano-scale thin
ﬁlm fabrication technique with remarkable uniformity and confor-
mity in surface geometry. Since the materials are deposited layer
by layer in atomic level, ALD is an excellent technology to precisely
control the thickness of deposited thin ﬁlms[1,2]. However, this
intrinsic superiority comes along with a serious limitation: low
throughput, especially in the industrial level ALD applications
[3,4]. The conventional single wafer ALD, for instance, can only
achieve 1.1–1.3 Å/cycle growth rate, that is a few nm per min for
deposition of Al2O3 [5]. This growth rate is considered too low[6].
Various solutions have been proposed to resolve this issue. It’s
widely accepted that scaling up to batch ALD with novel reactor
design can improve the throughput dramatically[6]. As early as
1970s, for instance, ﬂat panel displays were already fabricated
through batch ALD reactors[3]. Fig. 1 (a) shows a typical
stack-type batch ALD reactor. Unlike single wafer ALD, batch ALD
reactors allow multiple substrates to be processed simultaneously
[7]. However, the scaling-up to batch ALD is not always straightfor-
ward. Because of the increased reactor chamber volume and the
presence of multiple wafers, the gas ﬂow ﬁeld in batch ALD is
altered by the stacks of wafers inside the chamber. As a result,
mass transport process is decelerated, and consequently, precursor
exposure and purging processes are much longer than single wafer
ALD reactors[6]. This weakens the beneﬁts of increased through-
put brought by the batch conﬁguration.
The multi-wafer batch ALD still adopts the original conven-
tional ALD philosophy of separating the two half ALD reactions in
time. Spatial ALD, however, as illustrated inFig. 1(b), is totally
based on a brand new concept[8]. In conventional ALD, the precur-
sors are dosed one by one, and separated in time by a purging step,
but with the spatial idea, the ALD surface reactions are separated in
space other than in time, and precursors are dosed simultaneously
and continuously with the relative movement of wafer belt[5].
Particularly, as shown inFig. 1(b), the precursors are introduced
at different positions on the wafer surface to enable the corre-
sponding half ALD surface reactions. By introducing a pumping
system and an inert separating gas, e.g., nitrogen or argon, the
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.01.034
0017-9310//C2112016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 414 229 5639; fax: +1 414 229 6958.
E-mail address: cyuan@uwm.edu (C. Yuan).
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
journal homepage: www.else vier.com/locate/ijhmt


precursors and the reactions are separated in space. A complete full
cycle of ALD is achieved by the relative movement of wafer belt.
This continuous dosing process makes the spatial ALD system
highly superior in ﬁlm grow rate. It is demonstrated the spatial
ALD can achieve as high as a few nm/s deposition rate, compared
to a few nm/min in the conventional ALD system[5,9].
Following the same idea, spatial ALD reactors have two varia-
tions in structure: in-line spatial ALD as illustrated inFig. 1(b),
Fig. 1. (a) stack-type multi-wafer batch ALD reactor[7]; (b) in-line spatial ALD reactor[8,10]; and (c) rotary spatial ALD reactor.
Nomenclature
A pre-exponential factor in the Arrhenius equation
b0 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for reactant bulk species
b00 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for product bulk species
B bulk (solid) species
c local molar fraction
E total energy (J)
Ea reaction activation energy (J mol/C0 1)
F external body forces (N)
g0 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for reactant gaseous species
g00 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for product gaseous species
G gaseous species
h enthalpy (J kg/C0 1)
Jm mass diffusive ﬂux (kg m/C0 2 s/C0 1)
Jh energy diffusive ﬂux (W m/C0 2)
k material thermal conductivity (W m/C0 1 K/C0 1)
kf rate constant of reactionr
M molecular weight (kg mol/C0 1)
Nb total number of bulk species
Ng total number of gaseous species
NR total number of surface reactions
Ns total number of surface species
P static pressure (Pa)
p boundary partial pressure (Pa)
p0 base pressure (Pa)
R the gas constant (J mol/C0 1 K/C0 1)
Ri Arrhenius molar rate of production of theith species
(mol m/C0 3 s/C0 1)
^R net rate of production of species by chemical reaction
(mol m/C0 3 s/C0 1)
R mass reaction rate (kg m/C0 3 s/C0 1)
s0 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for reactant surface species
s00 stoichiometric coefﬁcient for product surface species
S surface species
t time (s)
T temperature (K)
V velocity (m s/C0 1)
XX direction in Cartesian coordinate
YY direction in Cartesian coordinate
ZZ direction in Cartesian coordinate
Greek symbols
q mixture density (kg m/C0 3)
~s stress tensor (N m/C0 2)
b temperature exponent in the Arrhenius equation
Subscripts
b bulk species
g gaseous species
i the ith species
r the rth reaction
s surface species
w wall surfaces
Superscript
⁄ surface site species
190 D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198

and rotary spatial ALD inFig. 1(c). A typical thermal spatial ALD
system (in-line or rotary) includes a wafer belt driving system, a
heating unit, an exhaust pumping system, and a gas delivery sys-
tem, which consists of precursors and separating gas injecting
pipelines, the precursor dosing cylinders, and separating gas inject-
ing cylinders. The pumping system is to maintain a relatively low
pressure (/C24 10/C0 1 torr) in the system, and to purge the residual
gases. A gap must be kept between the gas cylinders and the wafer
belt to allow gas ﬂow development and the wafer-cylinder relative
movement.
Choice of gap size is an critical issue in designing spatial ALD
reactors, because inappropriate gap size may result in intermixture
of precursor gases, and hence intermixing reactions[4]. To investi-
gate the inﬂuence of the gap on the ﬂow ﬁelds, Suh et al. performed
gas ﬂow simulations and Al2O3 deposition experiments for a rotary
spatial ALD reactor with a gap of 5 mm[4]. Generally, too big gaps
(>5 mm) will inevitably cause precursor gases intermixing,
whereas too smaller gaps (<1 mm) will hinder the gas ﬂow, and
thus the deposition process. Smaller gaps also pose a practical
problem of wafer movement in massive production when the large
wafer size and uneven wafer surfaces are considered[4].
Besides, the deposition process in a thermal spatial ALD system
is also highly dependent on a variety of process factors, such as
temperature, precursor surface concentration, system pressure,
and the precursor exposure time[5]. Since the chemical kinetic
information involved in the ALD deposition process is highly
temperature-dependent, the deposition rate is largely affected by
the deposition temperature [11]. Precursor concentration on the
wafer surface is determined by the mass ﬂow ﬁeld, which is inﬂu-
enced by the precursor and pumping pressures, and the gap size as
well. The exposure time is determined by the conﬁguration of spa-
tial ALD rectors (e.g., size of dosing cylinders, gap size, etc.) and the
relative movement speed of the wafer belt.
Due to the above complexity, studying these inﬂuential factors
is crucial in designing spatial ALD systems, not only avoiding
unnecessary long cycle time but also the non-uniform depositions
due to the ﬂuctuations in deposition temperature, gas ﬂows and
exposure times [5]. Poodt et al. carried an experimental study on
the chemical kinetics of depositing Al2O3 in a rotary spatial ALD
system at atmospheric pressure[5]. The effects of deposition tem-
perature, precursor pressures, and precursor exposure times were
investigated and discussed for a rotary spatial ALD system in this
cited work. As an important factor in gas ﬂow development and
deposition process, the gap size, however, is not included in their
studies. Furthermore, the results obtained from the rotary spatial
reactor may not apply to the in-line ALD system.
To better serve the purpose of investigating the effects of the
geometric and process parameters on the in-line spatial ALD pro-
cess, in this paper we have implemented a systematic study using
an experimentally-veriﬁed ﬂuid dynamic and chemical kinetic
model for an in-line spatial ALD system. To be speciﬁc, the tran-
sient spatial ALD process of depositing Al2O3 ﬁlms on a silicon
wafer belt using trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water is studied
numerically. Three geometric and process factors (gap size, deposi-
tion temperature, and pumping pressures) are considered in two
essential aspects of ﬂow ﬁeld and surface chemical deposition
kinetics. Their inﬂuences on the ﬂuid dynamics and surface chem-
ical kinetics are explored and discussed in the following sections.
2. In-line spatial ALD process modeling
ALD is a strongly coupled process, but mathematical modeling
is more feasible for the weakly-coupled or uncoupled process.
Therefore, modeling spatial ALD ﬁrstly involves decoupling of the
ALD processes. In a word, the mathematical modeling requires
separating or decoupling the actual processes, but seeking solu-
tions to the targeted system from mathematical models requires
integrating and coupling each speciﬁc process.
Particularly, in the concerned in-line spatial system, ALD can be
dissociated into several physical and chemical processes. ALD is a
dry ﬁlm fabrication technique, and the materials interact with solid
surfaces in gaseous states, so the process is ﬁrstly decoupled into
gas dynamics (momentum transport). ALD process involves two
or more precursor species, e.g., TMA and water in Al2O3 ALD, and
hence it is also a multi-species transport process. To activate the
surface chemistry in ALD process, the system is heated to certain
temperature, and thus heat transfer is also considered. The knowl-
edge in these ﬁelds is well-established, and the individual mathe-
matical model is readily available.
The precursor materials in ALD react with the ligand-
terminated surface sites, and thus, the surface chemical kinetics
is considered for the deposition process. Owing to the complexity
of ALD actual reaction mechanisms, detailed chemical modeling
of ALD still remains a big challenge[1]. The main reason is that
few experimental studies can be found on the detailed information
of the ALD chemical kinetics and side reactions. Theoretical studies
regarding ALD surface reaction mechanisms and chemical reaction
pathways are mainly based on the ﬁrst principle methods, such as
density functional theory (DFT) method[12–15]. Therefore, adopt-
ing simpliﬁed theoretical reaction mechanisms and kinetic infor-
mation is the feasible and practical way to model the deposition
process.
With above decoupling, each process is modeled by correspond-
ing partial differential equations (PDEs) as given in Eqs.(1)–(8).
Analytical solutions to these PDEs would be extremely difﬁcult
and even impossible, mainly because of their nonlinearities.
Numerical solutions, however, can be readily obtained on deﬁned
discrete nodes in the ﬂuid domain through iterative numerical
approximations. Obtaining the overall numerical solutions
requires coupling the system of PDEs by taking interactions
between each physical and chemical process into account. The
detailed modeling process is described in our previous paper[1].
The numerical model adopted surface reaction kinetics and mech-
anisms based on the atomic-level calculations [13,15], and the
numerical model has been validated through experiments[1].I n
this paper we focus on using the numerical model to investigate
the transient gas ﬂow and chemical deposition processes in the
in-line spatial ALD of Al2O3.
The modeling equations for the physical processes, including
momentum transport, species transport and heat transfer, are
brieﬂy summarized as follows,
@q
@t þ r /C1ð q~VÞ¼ 0 ð1Þ
@
@t ðq~VÞþ r /C1ð q~V~VÞ¼/C0 rP þ r /C1 ~s þ q~g þ~F ð2Þ
@
@t ðqciÞþ r /C1ð qci~VÞ¼/C0 r /C1 ~Jm;i þ Ri ð3Þ
@
@t ðqEÞþ r /C1 ~VðqE þ PÞ
hi
¼ r /C1 krT /C0
X
i
hi~Jh;i þð ~s /C1 ~VÞ
"#
ð4Þ
where q is the density,~V is the velocity vector,P is the static pres-
sure, q~g and ~F are the gravitational body force and external body
forces, respectively;~s is the stress tensor,ci is the local molar frac-
tion of speciesi, Ri is the net rate of production of speciesi by chem-
ical reaction,~Jm;i is the mass diffusive ﬂux of mixture speciesi, k is
the material thermal conductivity,hi is the enthalpy of mixture spe-
cies i, and~Jh;i is the energy diffusive ﬂux of mixture speciesi.
D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198 191

In our study, we adopted a continuum-based method, which
treats the concerned domain as a continuum. The continuity
Eq. (1) conserves mass. The Navier–Stokes Eq.(2) are adopted to
model the process of momentum transport in the laminar ﬂow of
spatial ALD reactor [16,17]. The species transport process is
governed by the convection–diffusion Eq.(3) in the spatial ALD
system [18]. The energy Eq. (4) is modeling the overall heat
transfer in spatial ALD reactor.
For the surface chemical kinetics, the laminar ﬁnite-rate (LFR)
method is adopted. Due to the instabilities of ﬂow caused by
turbulent ﬂuctuations even in an identiﬁed laminar ﬂow, numeri-
cal imitations have huge difﬁculties in terms of computational con-
vergence and stability. In the LFR method, a laminar approximation
is used with the effect of turbulence ignored, considering the
veriﬁed laminar ﬂow in our ALD system[2]. To couple the surface
reactions, the chemistry contributions in species transport must be
taken into account, and the ﬁnite species generation rates by
reactions are determined by the Arrhenius expression.
Consider the general form of an irreversible surface reaction in
spatial ALD reactor, and assume there areNg gaseous species, Nb
bulk species andNs surface species involved,
XNg
i¼1
g0
iGi þ
XNb
i¼1
b
0
iBi þ
XNs
i¼1
s0
iSi /C131/C131 /C131 !
kf XNg
i¼1
g00
i Gi þ
XNb
i¼1
b
00
i Bi þ
XNs
i¼1
s00
i Si ð5Þ
where G, B, andS are gaseous, bulk and surface species,g0
i, b
0
i and s0
i
are the stoichiometric coefﬁcients for theith species as a reactant,
g00
i b
00
i and s00
i are the stoichiometric coefﬁcients for theith species
as a product. The reaction rate constantkf is determined through
the Arrhenius expression,
kf ¼ ATb exp /C0 Ea
RT
/C18/C19
ð6Þ
where A is the pre-exponential factor,b is the temperature expo-
nent, Ea is the activation energy,T is temperature in K, andR is
the universal gas constant.
By the chemical kinetics rate law [19], the reaction rate
(in mol/m3/C1 s) R is obtained for the above surface reaction,
R ¼ kf
YNg
i¼1
½Gi/C138
g0
i
w
YNs
j¼1
½Sj/C138
s0
j
w ð7Þ
where, [ ]w represents surface coverage and molar concentrations
(mol/m3) on the wafer surfaces for surface and gaseous species,
respectively. The net molar production rate of each species i is
determined by considering the species both as a reactant and a
product,
^RG;i ¼ð g00
i /C0 g0
iÞR; i ¼ 1; 2; ... ; Ng
^RB;i ¼ð b
00
i /C0 b
0
iÞR; i ¼ 1; 2; ... ; Nb
^RS;i ¼ð s00
i /C0 s0
iÞR; i ¼ 1; 2; ... ; Ns
8
>><
>>:
ð8Þ
It has been shown by DFT calculations, the chemisorption reac-
tion mechanism is more kinetically favorable than ligand exchange
mechanism [13].I nA l2O3 thin ﬁlm deposition process, surface
chemisorption reactions in the spatial ALD reactor are modeled
by the following two half reactions as:
2AlðCH3Þ3ðgÞþ 3/C3 OHðsÞ) /C3 Al /C0 CH3ðsÞþ /C3 Al /C0ð CH3Þ2ðsÞ
þ 3OðbÞþ 3CH4ðgÞ" ð 9Þ
3H2OðgÞþ /C3 Al /C0 CH3ðsÞþ /C3 Al /C0ð CH3Þ2ðsÞ
) 3/C3 OHðsÞþ 2AlðbÞþ 3CH4ðgÞ" ð 10Þ
where ⁄ and (s) represent surface site species, b for bulk (solid) spe-
cies, and g for gas. At the initial state, the wafer surface is covered
by hydroxyl group.The deposition reaction is initialized with TMA
dosing process as modeled by Eq.(9). This leaves the wafer surface
with OAAl bonds and methyl-terminated surface sites, which are
prepared for the second half reaction in water dosing process as
given by Eq.(10). After water dosing, the surface is built with AlAO
bonds and hydroxyl-terminated sites. At this point, the surface is
coated with one layer of aluminum and oxygen atoms foming the
Al2O3 ﬁlm materials. Multilayer depositions are achieved by repeat-
ing the two half reactions.
The mass production rate of speciesi (in kg/m3/C1 s) Ri referred in
Eq. (3) is readily determined from the surface reactions,
Ri ¼ Mw;i
XNR
r¼1
^Ri;r ð11Þ
where NR is the total number of surface reactions in ALD chamber,
e.g., for Al2O3 ALD process, there are two half reactions (9) and (10),
and Mw;i is the molecular weight of speciesi.
In summary, the precursor distributions (mass transfer) in the
spatial ALD system are obtained by solving the species transport
Eq. (3), which is coupled with the mass conservation Eq. (1),
momentum conservation Eq. (2) and energy Eq. (4). To take the
reaction contributions into account, the species production rate
Ri in Eq. (3) is achieved by solving the chemical kinetics rate
Eq. (7) for both TMA and water dosing processes represented by
Eqs. (9) and (10), respectively.
Fig. 2. 3D computational domain of in-line spatial ALD reactor: (a) ﬂuid domain in
the two precursor dosing cylinders, one separating gas injecting cylinder, two
exhaust cylinders, and the gap spaces between each arrangement, dimension scale
in meters, and (b) center slice of the 3D domain, A, B, C and D are the probing points
for the ﬂow or chemical deposition analysis.
192 D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198

3. Numerical implementations
3.1. System boundary deﬁnition
The system boundary is ﬁrstly deﬁned to model the spatial ALD
process. The spatial ALD cycle is deﬁned in space, and therefore the
system boundary is determined by relevant components.Fig. 2
illustrates the 3D computational domain of in-line spatial ALD
reactor. A complete inline spatial ALD cycle of Al2O3 goes through
half reactions. Since a speciﬁc position on wafer can only complete
a half reaction at one time experiencing one precursor material
ﬂow under the dosing cylinder, a complete cycle requires the posi-
tion move to the second precursor dosing cylinder. Consequently,
the system includes two precursor cylinders in order to model a
complete spatial ALD cycle. Additionally, between water and
TMA dosing cylinders, separating gas (nitrogen) is introduced to
separate the two precursors. Besides, two exhaust cylinders are
connected to a vacuum pump as shown inFig. 2(a). The system
boundary is presented as the three-dimensional domain inFig. 2.
3.2. Boundary conditions
Boundary conditions are the physical (ﬂuid, thermal, etc.) and
chemical constraints (concentration, surface coverage, etc.) deﬁned
on each boundary of the ﬂuid domain, such as inlets, outlets, walls,
and reactive surfaces in the spatial ALD domain[20,21]. Water/
TMA inlets are deﬁned as the vapor partial pressure entering the
system with room temperature (25/C176C). The actual partial pressure
is determined by the saturated precursor vapor pressure and the
background pressure in the ALD system. Separating gas is fed at
a certain ﬂow rate to ensure proper separation of the precursor
gases.
The spatial ALD reactor is driven by a vacuum pump with base
pressure as low as 0.22 torr. The high vacuum environment is
desirable for better surface reactions and gas separation. The
exhaust outlet is the pumping pressure which can be adjusted
from 0.22 to 0.32 torr. When assigning a pressure boundary condi-
tion, for an incompressible ﬂow, it implies the ﬂow velocity can be
computed via Bernoulli’s equation as following[16,17],
p ¼ p0 þ 1
2 qV2 ð12Þ
where p is the boundary partial pressure,p0 is the base pressure,V
is the gas ﬂow velocity. With the equation, the boundary mass ﬂow
rate and ﬂuxes of momentum, energy, and species can then be com-
puted from the velocity information.
The system wall (cylinder and pipe wall) is treated as stationary
wall boundary conditions with no mass transfer but only heat
transfer across the boundary. Thermal constraint for the wall is a
certain maintained temperature condition. To prevent precursor
vapors from condensing, 150/C176C is maintained on these walls. The
moving wafer belt usually has relative higher temperature, e.g.,
200 /C176C, to activate the surface reaction. The wafer top surface is
deﬁned as reactive sites, where there are both heat and mass
transfers.
3.3. Initial conditions
For a transient system, numerical methods are approaching to
the analytical solutions iteratively starting from the initial values,
and hence the ﬂuid, thermal and chemical initial numerical values
need be assigned before calculations[20,21]. Speciﬁcally, in actual
spatial ALD applications, the separating gas is ﬁrstly injected into
the system for a few minutes to purge the air out and stabilize
the system to the prescribed base pressure. The system domain
is fully taken by the separating gas, nitrogen before depositions.
Therefore, in our simulations, the pressure, velocity, concentration
values of nitrogen are adopted as the initial conditions.
For chemical initial values, full coverages of hydroxyl and
methanl group are assumed on the wafer surfaces under TMA
and water dosing cylinder, respectively. Three levels of gap size
(1, 1.5, and 2 mm), temperature (150/C176C, 200/C176C and 250/C176C), and
pumping pressure (0.22, 0.27 and 0.32 torr) are simulated to study
their effects on the ﬂow and suface depostion process.
3.4. Numerical calculations
Numerical calculations of the model equations are carried out
within the framework of ANSYS Fluent using the Finite Volume
Method (FVM). The 3D domain is ﬁrstly divided into numerous
ﬁnite volumes with a non-structural tetrahedron meshing scheme
as shown inFig. 2(a). The actual meshing size is ﬁnally decided by a
compromise between calculation accuracy and computational cost.
The model equations are then discretized in space by the
second-order upwind method and the values at each domain node
are calculated by FVM with a pressure–velocity coupled scheme as
given in Eq.(12). The second-order implicit method is used for the
discretization of the model equations in time domain. The implicit
method is to ensure computational stability, and the second-order
method is for a sufﬁcient computational accuracy. As shown in
Fig. 2(b), during the calculations, transient values at the four points
on the wafer top surface are probed for species concentrations
(position B and C) and surface depositions (position A and D). With
species concentration information, ﬂow and intermixing of precur-
sor materials are investigated, and with surface reactions, the ﬁlm
deposition process is studied.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Effects on the in-line spatial ALD ﬂow ﬁeld
In this section, effects of the three factors on the spatial ALD
ﬂow ﬁeld are characterized numerically, including gap size, tem-
perature and pumping pressure. The main concern of precursor
intermixture in in-line spatial ALD is paid special attention in this
part, because the intermixture would deteriorate the ﬁlm deposi-
tion quality by enabling the chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-
type reactions in the system.Fig. 3 shows the transient process
during the dosing steps for different gap sizes.
The precursor concentrations at point B and C are shown in
Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. It’s seen that TMA material is indeed
present at the water side for all the gap sizes, and water is detected
at the TMA side. Both precursor concentrations are increasing until
the steady states are achieved during the 0.1 s dosing process. TMA
concentration level (in 10/C0 5 mol/m3), however, is much lower than
water concentration (in 10/C0 3 mol/m3) as shown inFig. 3(a).
Comparing the steady concentration levels, it is found that gap
size inﬂuences the precursor distributions signiﬁcantly. InFig. 3
(a), 1.5 mm and 2 mm gap sizes both result in lower TMA concen-
tration levels (<10/C0 5 mol/m3), and 1 mm gap yields the highest
level (>3/C2 10/C0 5 mol/m3). Together withFig. 3(b), it is found that
intermixing is reversely related to the gap size from 1 mm to
2 mm. Bigger gap spatial ALD reactor has less intermixing, and
smaller gap makes the dosing process much longer. As indicated
by both ﬁgures, it takes much longer time for the spatial ALD
process with 1 mm gap to reach the steady state.
The observations are mainly due to the weaker convective mass
transfer in smaller gap spatial ALD reactor. With 1 mm gap, for
instance, the gas ﬂow is largely hindered by the narrow gap.
Considering the fact that in-line spatial ALD is a high vacuum
system (0.22 torr), the material transport in such cases is mainly
D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198 193

driven by mass and thermal diffusions other than convection.
Because mass diffusive effect is much weaker compared to convec-
tion, the mass transfer process is much prolonged. These diffused
molecules are accumulated in the exhaust cylinder due to lack of
convective forces, and consequently a relative higher concentra-
tion is resulted in 1 mm gap in-line spatial ALD reactor as shown
in Fig. 3. However, in the case of large gas size, e.g., 5 mm, stronger
convective mass transport also increases the intermixing.
At TMA side (position C) as shown in Fig. 3(b), a relatively
higher intermixing is observed, especially for 1 mm gap size
compared to the water side. Water concentration is
/C24 5 /C2 10/C0 4 mol/m3 at position C. As a comparison, TMA concentra-
tion is/C24 2 /C2 10/C0 3 mol/m3 with a relative intermixing ratio (deﬁned
as the concentration ratio of the foreign gas to the home gas) 1:4
for 1 mm gap size. This is owing to the fact that water has a relative
higher inlet vapor pressure resulting stronger water diffusive
process. This is further conﬁrmed byFig. 4, which compares the
relative intermixing ratio at both sides. As revealed in bothFigs. 3
and 4, intermixing is weaker at water side. At both sides, increasing
gap size from 1 mm to 2 mm decreases the intermixing.
The effect of pumping pressure on material transport is exam-
ined by changing the relative pressure (to the base pressure) from
0, 0.05, to 0.1 torr, while the gap size and wafer temperature are
ﬁxed at 0.15 mm and 200/C176C. The values are consider no less than
the base pressure because in actual in-line spatial ALD system the
pumping pressure is usually a little higher than the stable base
vacuum pressure due to the imperfection of vacuum pump.
Fig. 5 presents the effects of pumping pressure on precursor
distribution and intermixing for position B and C. It is found that
higher pumping pressure (e.g., 0.1 torr) results in higher TMA
concentration at water side (position B) and higher water
concentration at TMA side (position C). For instance, water steady
Fig. 3. The effects of gap size on precursor intermixing with ideal pumping
condition (0.22 torr) and 200 /C176C deposition temperature: (a) TMA and water
concentration in mol/m3 at water side (position B) with gap size 1, 1.5, and 2 mm,
and (b) at TMA side (position C) with gap size 1, 1.5, and 2 mm.
Fig. 4. Comparison of relative intermixing ratios for position B (water side) and C
(TMA side) with different gap sizes, and the relative intermixing ratios is deﬁned as
the concentration ratio of the foreign gas to the home gas.
Fig. 5. The effects of relative pumping pressure (0, 0.05, to 0.1 torr) on the precursor
intermixing with gap size and wafer temperature ﬁxed at 1.5 mm and 200/C176C: (a)
TMA and water concentration in mol/m3 at water side (position B), and (b) at TMA
side (position C). The simulation time is 0.04 s with 1.5 mm gap size.
194 D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198

concentration level is /C24 2 /C2 10/C0 4,3 /C2 10/C0 4, and 5/C2 10/C0 4 mol/m3
for 0, 0.05 and 0.1 torr pumping pressure at position C (TMA side),
respectively. Hence, properly maintained pumping and base
pressure in ALD reactor is crucial to avoid precursor intermixing.
Wafer temperature effects on the ﬂow ﬁeld and precursor inter-
mixing in in-line spatial ALD reactor are investigated numerically
with 1.5 mm gap and 0.22 torr pumping pressure. The results pre-
sented inFig. 6show that at both sides higher wafer temperature
yields higher precursor concentration level from the other side.
With the wafer temperature as high as 250/C176C, the mass diffusive
process is accelerated, and hence higher TMA concentration level
is seen at water side (position B) asFig. 6(a), and higher water con-
centration level at TMA side (position C) asFig. 6(b).
From the above ﬂow and species transport simulations, it’s
concluded that in the high vacuum in-line spatial ALD system, dif-
fusive mass transfer is the major reason for precursor intermixing,
especially in scenarios of very small gap size. As demonstrated by
the numerical studies, 1 mm gap size yields highest intermixing
level because of the dominant mass diffusive effect. Higher
pumping pressure decreases the pressure difference from inlets
to outlets, and thus weakens the ﬂow convective effect. The
intermixing concentration level is seen lower if the low pumping
pressure is well maintained. Because higher temperature increases
the mass diffusion process, it results in higher intermixing
concentration level.
In summary, bigger gap (/C24 2 mm), lower pump pressure, and
lower wafer temperature are desirable to minimize the intermixing
level in the concerned in-line spatial ALD system. However, the opti-
mal choices of these factors must also be reconsidered in terms of
chemical deposition process. For example, lower wafer temperature
Fig. 6. The effects of wafer temperature (150 /C176C, 200 /C176C and 250 /C176C) on the
precursor intermixing with gap size and pumping pressure ﬁxed at 1.5 mm and
0.22 torr: (a) TMA and water concentration in mol/m3 at position B (water side),
and (b) at position C (TMA side). The simulation time is 0.04 s with 1.5 mm gap size.
Fig. 7. Growth per cycle of bulk Al 2O3 thin ﬁlms with different deposition
temperatures, 150 /C176C, 200 /C176C and 250 /C176C with 1.5 mm gap size and the ideal
pumping condition (0.22 torr).
Fig. 8. Growth per cycle of bulk Al2O3 thin ﬁlms with different gap sizes 1, 1.5 and
2 mm with ideal pumping condition (0.22 torr) and 200/C176C wafer temperature.
Fig. 9. Growth per cycle of bulk Al2O3 thin ﬁlms with different relative pumping
pressure (to the base pressure, 0.22 torr) 0, 0.05 and 0.1 torr with 1.5 mm gap size
and 200/C176C wafer temperature.
D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198 195

is beneﬁcial for avoiding intermixing, but it is not favorable for mate-
rial deposition process, because lower temperature may decrease
the ﬁlm deposition rate. Further numerical investigations on mate-
rial deposition process are presented in the following section.
4.2. Effects on the in-line spatial ALD chemical depositions
The effects of the three factors on the chemical depositions of
bulk Al2O3 in the in-line spatial ALD reactor is studied numerically
in terms of growth per cycle (GPC) of thin ﬁlms on the silicon wafer
belt. From simulations, the transient mass deposition rate of bulk
species O(b) and Al(b) in the two half reactions as presented in
Eqs. (9) and (10) is achieved by probing the material deposition
values at position A and D, respectively. Bulk Al2O3 mass growth
rate is obtained from integral of the resulted bulk species O(b)
and Al(b). Thickness growth per cycle in Å/cycle is then determined
by introducing alumina thin ﬁlm density[22].
Fig. 7presents Al2O3 deposition GPCs under different deposition
temperature conditions from 150, 200 to 250/C176C. The gap size and
pumping pressure are set as 1.5 mm and 0.22 torr. From the GPC
curves, material depositions are saturated at about 0.015 s dosing
time, or the critical dosing time. This critical dosing time is shown
sufﬁcient to complete the surface reactions, which completely con-
sume all the reactive surface sites. In this case beyond the critical
dosing time, the GPC remains unchanged even if the precursor is
still being dosed. This is the very desirable self-limiting feature of
ALD process. However, if dosing is shorter than the critical time,
the deposition rate increases rapidly with the precursor dosing
time. This is called the unsaturated growth period.
With the critical dosing time, the wafer belt moving speed is
readily to be deﬁned. For a speciﬁc point on the wafer belt, it takes
0.015 s to complete the half surface reactions contacting with the
precursor molecules under the dosing cylinders. The diameter of
precursor dosing cylinder in our in-line spatial ALD reactor is
1 cm, and hence the wafer belt movement speed is promptly calcu-
lated as/C24 0.67 m/s.
The overall throughput of the in-line spatial ALD system can
also be achieved from the critical dosing time. For example, as
shown inFig. 7, GPC at 200/C176Ci s/C24 1.2 Å/cycle, and the critical dos-
ing time is/C24 0.015 s. Since an ALD cycle takes two half reactions,
the growth thickness per second is calculated using the total cycle
time, which is 0.03 s.
Fig. 10. Slice contours of transient ﬂow and deposition process in the in-line spatial ALD reactor at 0.005, 0.015, 0.025, and 0.035 s for 1 mm gap size, 0.22 torrpumping
pressure, and 250/C176C wafer temperature.
196 D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198

GPC ¼ 1:2Å =cycle ¼ 1:2Å =0:03 s¼ 4n m=s ð13Þ
The overall throughput is signiﬁcantly improved compared to a
few nanometers per minute of growth rate in the conventional ALD
system [5,9].
By Fig. 7, it is seen higher temperature does increase the satu-
rated GPC, but the increment is much smaller and even negligible
during the unsaturated growth period, i.e., 0–0.015 s. The numeri-
cal simulation results have an excellent agreement with the exper-
imental results of cited work as presented in Ref. [5]. The
temperature effects reveal the chemical kinetic information on
the surface reactions. During the surface reactions, the introduced
thermal energy has to overcome the reaction barrier (activation
energy) to enable the reactions. Higher temperature increases the
reactivity of surface species as well as the species molecule kinetic
energy, and hence increases the collision probabilities, which
ﬁnally results in a higher reaction rate.
The effects of gap size on the chemical deposition process are
presented in Fig. 8. It takes much longer dosing time for GPC to
get saturated for smaller gap size spatial ALD process. For instance,
with 1 mm gap size,/C24 0.025 s dosing is required for GPC to get sat-
urated, compared to/C24 0.01 s for 2 mm gap. This is mainly attributed
to the slower mass transportation process caused by the narrower
gap as illustrated inFig. 3. From the GPC curves inFig. 8, however,
1 mm gap size has a relatively higher saturated GPC level. Spatial
ALD process with 1.5 mm gap size has a saturated GPC level as high
as 1 mm gap size, and requires shorter dosing time (/C24 0.012 s) to get
saturated. This shows that the depositions process is highly affected
by the ﬂow and mass transfer process.
The effect of pumping pressure on the surface deposition pro-
cess is shown relatively weaker inFig. 9. During the unsaturated
growth period before 0.015 s, smaller pumping pressure increases
the ﬁlm deposition rate slightly. Once saturated, they have the
same level of GPC. With different pumping conditions on the outlet
boundaries, as given byFig. 5the precursor intermixing is altered,
but the dominant precursor concentrations are comparable for all
the pumping cases. For instance, water concentration difference
as shown inFig. 5(a) is within 1/C2 10/C0 3 mol/m3 from 0 to 0.1 torr
relative pumping pressure. This is well correlated with the similar
thin ﬁlm deposition rate as illustrated inFig. 9.
To depict the overall transient ﬂow and reaction process,Fig. 10
presents the slice contours of transient ﬂow and deposition process
in the in-line spatial ALD reactor at 0.005, 0.015, 0.025 and 0.035 s,
respectively for 1 mm gap size, 0.22 torr pumping pressure, and
250 /C176C deposition temperature. The most left cylinder is for water
dosing, and the right one for TMA. The left wafer surface under
water dosing cylinder shows the half reaction of water dosing,
and the right for TMA dosing. At the initial state, the system is full
of the separating gas, nitrogen. With dosing proceeds, precursor
molecules gradually ﬁll the dosing cylinders. The middle three slice
contours show methane generation and distribution in the system.
Methane is generated from the both half reactions on the wafer
surfaces, and is purged out through the two pumping cylinders.
Very few methane can be detected in the middle separating cylin-
der during the whole process as shown inFig. 10(c) and (d).
To summarize the information on the in-line spatial ALD
growth process, the deposition is a strictly self-limiting process
depending on the reactive surface site status. The ﬁlm growth is
saturated to certain levels within different critical dosing times
under different deposition conditions. Demonstrated by the simu-
lation results, the saturated GPC level is heavily dependent on the
wafer temperature, gap size, but rarely on pumping pressure. To be
speciﬁc, higher wafer temperature (e.g., 250/C176C), a slightly smaller
gap size (e.g., 1.5 mm) and better maintained pumping condition
(e.g., 0.22 torr) are desirable to achieve higher ﬁlm growth rate. It
is also revealed that the chemical deposition process is highly
affected by the ﬂow and concentration conditions of precursors.
Surface chemical kinetics of the in-line spatial ALD is a function
of deposition temperature, ﬂow conditions, reactive surface sites,
and precursor distributions.
5. Conclusions
This paper systematically studied an in-line spatial ALD system
by numerical investigations of the gas ﬂow and surface chemical
deposition processes in ALD of Al2O3. The effects of three geometric
and process parameters, namely, gap size, temperature, and pump-
ing pressure, were considered with three levels, respectively. The
information on the ﬂuid dynamics in spatial ALD system is crucial
to avoid the precursor intermixing. By simulations, it’s found that
bigger gap (e.g., 2 mm) results in less precursor intermixing. How-
ever, when it comes to the surface chemistry, larger gap size gen-
erates slightly lower saturated deposition GPC level, despite the
critical dosing time is shorter. The optimal gap size is heavily
dependent on the geometrical and process parameter setup, as
well the trade-off between precursor intermixing and deposition
rate.
Wafer temperature is a signiﬁcant factor in both ﬂow and sur-
face deposition processes. Higher temperature, 250/C176C for example,
accelerates the diffusive mass transport which largely contributes
to the precursor intermixing. However, high temperature also
increases the ﬁlm deposition rate and results in a higher saturated
GPC level. Well-maintained pumping pressure is beneﬁcial to
decrease the concentration of precursor from the other side, but
its effect on the deposition process is seen very weak.
It is also concluded that the time scale of in-line spatial ALD
process is only in tens of milliseconds. As demonstrated in our
study, the typical critical dosing time of a half cycle in in-line spa-
tial ALD system is/C24 0.015 s, and it only takes 30 ms for a speciﬁc
point on the moving wafer belt to complete a full deposition cycle.
With this critical dosing time, it is possible to deﬁne the wafer belt
moving speed as/C24 0.67 m/s. Considering the in-line spatial ALD is
a continuous process without purging step, the ALD cycle time is
greatly shortened, and the overall throughput is shown as high
as /C24 4 nm/s, which is much higher compared to the conventional
sing-wafer ALD with several nanometers growth in a minute.
Acknowledgement
Financial support by National Science Foundation
(CMMI-1200940) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
[1] D. Pan, L. Ma, Y. Xie, T.C. Jen, C. Yuan, On the physical and chemical details of
alumina atomic layer deposition: a combined experimental and numerical
approach, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 33 (2) (2015).
[2] D.Q. Pan, T. Li, T.C. Jen, C. Yuan, Numerical modeling of carrier gas ﬂow in
atomic layer deposition vacuum reactor: a comparative study of lattice
Boltzmann models, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 32 (1) (2014).
[3] S. Haukka, ALD technology – present and future challenges, ECS Trans. 3 (15)
(2007) 15–26.
[4] S. Suh, S. Park, H. Lim, Y.J. Choi, C.S. Hwang, H.J. Kim, S.J. Won, Investigation on
spatially separated atomic layer deposition by gas ﬂow simulation and
depositing Al2O3 ﬁlms, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 30 (5) (2012).
[5] P. Poodt, J. van Lieshout, A. Illiberi, R. Knaapen, F. Roozeboom, A. van Asten, On
the kinetics of spatial atomic layer deposition, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 31 (1)
(2013).
[6] J.A.v. Delft, D. Garcia-Alonso, W.M.M. Kessels, Atomic layer deposition for
photovoltaics: applications and prospects for solar cell manufacturing,
Semicond. Sci. Technol. 27 (7) (2012). 074002.
[7] E. Granneman, P. Fischer, D. Pierreux, H. Terhorst, P. Zagwijn, Batch ALD:
characteristics, comparison with single wafer ALD, and examples, Surf. Coat.
Technol. 201 (22–23) (2007) 8899–8907.
[8] P. Johansson, K. Lahtinen, J. Kuusipalo, T. Kääriäinen, P. Maydannik, D.
Cameron, Atomic layer deposition process for barrier applications of ﬂexible
packaging, in: Tappi 2010 PLACE Conference, TAPPI, 2010.
D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198 197

[9] P. Poodt, A. Lankhorst, F. Roozeboom, K. Spee, D. Maas, A. Vermeer, High-speed
spatial atomic-layer deposition of aluminum oxide layers for solar cell
passivation, Adv. Mater. 22 (32) (2010) 3564–3567.
[10] P. Poodt, D.C. Cameron, E. Dickey, S.M. George, V. Kuznetsov, G.N. Parsons, F.
Roozeboom, G. Sundaram, A. Vermeer, Spatial atomic layer deposition: a route
towards further industrialization of atomic layer deposition, J. Vac. Sci.
Technol., A 30 (1) (2012).
[11] S.M. George, Atomic layer deposition: an overview, Chem. Rev. 110 (1) (2010)
111–131.
[12] A. Afshar, K.C. Cadien, Growth mechanism of atomic layer deposition of zinc
oxide: a density functional theory approach, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 (25) (2013).
[13] A. Delabie, S. Sioncke, J. Rip, S. Van Elshocht, G. Pourtois, M. Mueller, B.
Beckhoff, K. Pierloot, Reaction mechanisms for atomic layer deposition of
aluminum oxide on semiconductor substrates, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A 30 (1)
(2012).
[14] S.D. Elliott, J.C. Greer, Simulating the atomic layer deposition of alumina from
ﬁrst principles, J. Mater. Chem. 14 (21) (2004) 3246–3250.
[15] R.L. Puurunen, Growth per cycle in atomic layer deposition: a theoretical
model, Chem. Vap. Deposition 9 (5) (2003) 249–257.
[16] B.R. Munson, Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics sixth ed. with WileyPlus ﬁfth
ed. Set, John Wiley and Sons Canada, Limited, 2008.
[17] R.W. Fox, A.T. McDonald, P.J. Pritchard, Introduction to Fluid Mechanics, John
Wiley & Sons Canada, Limited, 2009.
[18] A.F. Mills, Basic Heat and Mass Transfer: Pearson New International Edition,
Pearson Education, Limited, 2013.
[19] J.I. Steinfeld, J.S. Francisco, W.L. Hase, Chemical Kinetics and Dynamics,
Prentice Hall, 1999.
[20] J.D. Hoffman, S. Frankel, Numerical Methods for Engineers and Scientists,
second ed., Taylor & Francis, 2001.
[21] S. Chapra, S.C. Chapra, R.P. Canale, Numerical Methods for Engineers, McGraw-
Hill Higher Education, 2010.
[22] M.D. Groner, F.H. Fabreguette, J.W. Elam, S.M. George, Low-temperature Al2O3
atomic layer deposition, Chem. Mater. 16 (4) (2004) 639–645.
198 D. Pan et al. / International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 96 (2016) 189–198