Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Chemical Engineering Research and Design
j ourna  l h omepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/cherd
Computational Fluid Dynamics simulation of the
ALD of alumina from TMA and H2O in a
commercial reactor
G.P . Gakis a,b, H. Vergnesb, E. Scheidc, C. Vahlasd, B. Caussat b,∗,
A.G. Boudouvis a
a National Technical University of Athens, School of Chemical Engineering, Athens, Greece
b Laboratoire de Génie Chimique, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT , UPS, Toulouse, France
c LAAS, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, Toulouse, France
d CIRIMAT , Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT , UPS, Toulouse, France
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 6 November 2017
Received in revised form 14
February 2018
Accepted 20 February 2018
Available online 2 March 2018
Keywords:
ALD
CFD
Alumina
TMA
Water
Film uniformity
a b s t r a c t
A three-dimensional
 Computational Fluid Dynamics model is built for a commercial Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD) reactor, designed to treat large area 20 cm substrates. The model aims
to
 investigate the effect of the reactor geometry and process parameters on the gas ﬂow and
temperature
 ﬁelds, and on the species distribution on the heated substrate surface, for the
deposition
 of Al2O3 ﬁlms from trimethyl aluminum and H2O. The investigation is performed
in
 transient conditions, without considering any surface reaction. A second CFD model is
developed
 for the feeding system of the reactor, in order to calculate the unknown reactant
inlet
 ﬂow rates. The two models are coupled via a computational strategy dictated by the
available
 experimental measurements. Results show that a purging ﬂow entering the reactor
through
 its loading door affects the ﬂow ﬁeld above the substrate surface and causes non-
uniformity
 in the temperature and reactants concentration on the substrate surface. During
the
 TMA pulse, a recirculation sets in above the substrate surface, leading to a non-uniform
distribution
 of
 species on the surface.
© 2018 Institution of Chemical Engineers. Published by Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) is a deposition technique, derived from
Chemical Vapor Deposition (Johnson et al., 2014), able to deposit highly
conformal and uniform material ﬁlms onto a substrate. ALD is based
on the sequential exposure of a surface to two reactants, with which
the surface reacts through self-terminating reactions (Johnson et al.,
2014; Puurunen, 2005; George, 2010), inside a reactor chamber. The
self-limiting nature of the surface reactions in the Atomic Layer Depo-
sition (ALD) process ensures a high control over the deposited material
ﬁlm thickness down to the monolayer level (George, 2010). High unifor-
mity and conformity of the deposited ﬁlm can thus be achieved under
optimized conditions (George, 2010). These characteristics make ALD a
favorable tool to produce ultra-thin ﬁlms for a variety of applications
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail
 address: brigitte.caussat@ensiacet.fr (B. Caussat).
in microelectronics, optoelectronics, catalysis, renewable energy and
more (Johnson et al., 2014). However, ALD is a complex technique since
it depends on the nature of the reactants and on the process condi-
tions, and for this reason, research regarding the surface reactions and
growth mechanisms is still ongoing.
One of the most studied ALD processes is the deposition of
Al2O3 ﬁlms from tri-methyl aluminum (Al(CH3)3, TMA) and H2O vapor
(Puurunen, 2005; Higashi and Fleming, 1989; Wind and George, 2010;
Groner et al., 2004; Dillon et al., 1995; Ferguson et al., 2000; Ott et al.,
1997; Elam et al., 2002; Salami et al., 2017; Henn-Lecordier et al., 2011a,b;
Mousa et al., 2012; Li et al., 2007; Elliott and Greer, 2004; Widjaja and
Musgrave, 2002; Weckman and Laasonen, 2015; Delabie et al., 2012;
Travis and Adomaitis, 2014, 2013; Gobbert et al., 2002; Mazaleyrat et al.,
2005; Pan et al., 2015a,b, 2016; Xie et al., 2015, 2016; Deng et al., 2016;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2018.02.031
0263-8762/© 2018 Institution of Chemical Engineers. Published by Elsevier B.V . All rights reserved.

796 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Shaeri et al., 2015, 2004). Both reactants satisfy the chemical and ther-
modynamic criteria for an ALD precursor, as they are volatile and
thermally
 stable for a range of temperatures (Puurunen, 2005) and can
involve self-limiting surface reactions (Higashi and Fleming, 1989). A
great number of experimental works has been published on this chem-
ical system (Higashi and Fleming, 1989; Wind and George, 2010; Groner
et al., 2004; Dillon et al., 1995; Ferguson et al., 2000; Ott et al., 1997; Elam
et
 al., 2002; Salami et al., 2017; Henn-Lecordier et al., 2011a; Mousa et al.,
2012; Li et al., 2007; Henn-Lecordier et al., 2011b), in numerous reactor
conﬁgurations and a wide range of process conditions and substrates.
The robustness of the process and the wealth of literature reports
demonstrate that ALD of Al2O3 offers a convenient model system to
get insight to the fundamentals of the ALD processes in general.
ALD is an inherently multi-scale process. From the interaction of
molecules at the atomic scale and the ﬁlm growth evolution at the
nano-scale, to the deposition inside surface features at the micro-scale
or the thickness control on the substrate at the dm scale, and vice versa,
the physical and chemical phenomena taking place are coupled. The
difference in the time scales of the involved mechanisms, such as dif-
fusion and adsorption of gaseous reactants and surface reactions, is
another factor contributing to the complexity of the process. As exper-
imental
 investigations are tedious at such different time and length
scales, physical based modelling has emerged as a way to study the
fundamentals of those mechanisms. A wide number of density func-
tional theory (DFT) calculations (Elliott and Greer, 2004; Widjaja and
Musgrave, 2002; Weckman and Laasonen, 2015; Delabie et al., 2012) has
been published to study the surface reaction energetics during the reac-
tant exposure steps of the ALD process of alumina from TMA and H2O.
These investigations consider the nature of the surface phenomena,
and the different reaction states that the reactant molecules undergo
during the process. Using the above energetics, Travis and Adomaitis
(2014,
 2013) investigated the surface reaction kinetics, and the process
dynamics during the ALD cycle. Gobbert et al. (2002) studied the step
coverage
 inside surface trenches using a feature scale model, while
Mazaleyrat et al. (2005) used kinetic Monte Carlo simulations to study
the growth evolution of alumina on silicon substrates.
However, as the process takes place into an ALD reactor, the process
parameters affect the transport phenomena inside the reactor chamber
(Higashi and Fleming, 1989; Wind and George, 2010; Groner et al., 2004;
Dillon et al., 1995; Ferguson et al., 2000; Ott et al., 1997; Elam et al., 2002;
Salami et al., 2017), and hence the pressure and temperature ﬁelds, as
well as the reactant concentrations, on which the surface reactions are
dependent. As these phenomena are difﬁcult to study experimentally,
numerical simulations in the reactor have emerged as a powerful tool
for the process analysis of ALD reactors, complementary to the surface
reactions analysis by DFT (Pan et al., 2015a,b, 2016; Xie et al., 2015, 2016;
Deng et al., 2016; Shaeri et al., 2015, 2004). Indeed, reactor scale mod-
elling
 via Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) (Xenidou et al., 2010;
Zahi et al., 2010) can provide useful insight regarding transport phe-
nomena inside an ALD reactor, such as the temperature ﬁeld along the
chamber, the local gas velocity, and the reactant distribution on the
substrate during the reactant exposure steps. This can help determin-
ing the optimal conditions for the process, in terms of minimization of
pulse and purging times, leading to less reactant consumption and pro-
cess time required. CFD simulations can also be used to study the effect
of a given geometry on the process, especially in the case of reactors
treating large area substrates (>10 cm). Uniform temperatures and reac-
tant concentrations on the whole surface of the substrate are required
to obtain uniform ALD ﬁlms. This means that the study of transport
phenomena inside the reactor is crucial for the quality of the deposited
ﬁlm, in terms of uniformity and conformity. CFD simulations have been
performed to investigate the effect of numerous process parameters on
the ﬁlm deposition (Pan et al., 2015a; Xie et al., 2015), and to determine
the optimal dose and purge times for certain process conditions (Deng
et al., 2016). Xie et al. (2016) studied the reactant dosing efﬁciency dur-
ing the ALD process, in order to optimize reactant usage. Pan et al.
(2015b)
 analyzed the process in order to ﬁnd the optimal arrangement
for a multi-wafer reactor setup. Shaeri et al. (2015, 2004) studied dif-
ferent reactor designs to optimize the deposition large area substrates.
A spatial ALD reactor, separating the reactants via the substrate posi-
tion instead of time, was also studied via CFD simulations by Pan et al.
(2016).
In this work, a three-dimensional CFD model is built for a com-
mercial ALD reactor with a complex geometry, depositing Al2O3 ﬁlms
via the TMA/H2O process, on large area 20 cm substrates. The aim of
this work is to investigate the transport phenomena occurring inside
the reaction chamber during the ALD process in transient conditions
during
 the exposure and purge steps. This is the ﬁrst step towards an
integrated
 investigation of the ALD process, including, at a later stage,
surface reactions. The CFD model of the ALD reactor itself is coupled
with a second CFD model of the feeding system to account for the reac-
tants inlet ﬂow rates, due to the absence of corresponding experimental
data during the ALD exposure steps. The impact of the complex reactor
geometry on the temperature, gas ﬂow ﬁelds and reactant distribution
on the substrate is studied.
2. Process description
2.1. ALD setup
The model is developed for the geometry of a commercial
Ultratech
®
Fiji F200 ALD set-up. It consists of the ALD reactor
and the reactant feeding system as detailed in Fig. 1.
The reactor has three gas inlets, hereafter called top inlet,
side inlet,
 
and
 loading door inlet, as shown in Fig. 1a. A steady
ﬂow of argon (Ar) is permanently fed to the reactor via its
top inlet, from which the majority of purging gas is enter-
ing the reactor chamber. Another Ar ﬂow is permanently fed
through the load lock inlet in order to purge the loading door,
and reduce the amount of alumina deposited on the load-
ing door walls. The side inlet is connected to the reactant
feeding system (Fig.
 1b). Through the side inlet, a third Ar
ﬂow
 is permanently fed, which serves as a carrier gas for
the reactants during the ALD exposure steps, and as a purge
gas for the ALD purging period. The Ar ﬂow is regulated by
mass ﬂow controllers (MFC), while the reactant pulses are con-
trolled by the opening time of ALD valves. The reactor outlet is
connected to a turbo-molecular vacuum pump. The pumping
speed and base pressure are regulated with an automatic pres-
sure controller (APC) unit. The APC unit consists of a heated
throttling and sealing butterﬂy valve, installed upstream of the
turbo pump. The base pressure is regulated in advance using
a capacitance manometer at the reactor outlet, while during
deposition, the outlet pressure is monitored by a Pirani gauge.
Indeed, the capacitance manometer isolation valve is auto-
matically closed during an ALD recipe, to prevent deposition
on the measuring device. Hence, the only data provided during
deposition is the pressure variation at the reactor outlet mea-
sured by the Pirani gauge. The reactor walls and the precursor
feeding system are heated via a jacket, while the substrate is
heated via a chuck. The loading door walls are not heated.
The feeding system consists of two stainless steel bottles,
in which the TMA and H2O are stored, and a heated tube cir-
cuit. The Ar ﬂow enters the feeding system at 20 ◦C through
its inlet shown in Fig. 1b. The feeding system outlet is con-
nected to the reactor side inlet. The tube circuit is heated to
150 ◦C, while the reactant bottles are heated through conduc-
tion to a measured temperature of 28 ◦C. The ALD valves are
closed during the ALD purging times to ensure that no reac-
tant is injected into the reactor chamber. During the exposure
times, the valve of the respective reactant bottle opens for a
given time, releasing the vapor pressure of the reactant gas
above the surface of the liquid, which is injected into the reac-
tor simply by pressure difference between the bottle and the
reactor.

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 797
Fig. 1 – Schematics of the ALD system (Ultratech
®
Fiji F200): a) the ALD reactor chamber, b) the reactant feeding system.
2.2. Process conditions
The TMA/H2O chemical system is considered in the model as
ideal, i.e.
 the reactions occurring between the reactants and
the
 surface fulﬁll the self-limiting criterion. Methane (CH4),
the reaction by-product, is assumed inert (Johnson et al., 2014)
and thermodynamically ideal; it is volatile and thermally sta-
ble at the prevailing temperature (Puurunen, 2005).
Although
 not considered in the present modeling, the over-
all reactions taking place on a previously hydroxylated surface
during the reactant exposures are shown hereafter (Pan et al.,
2016), for the understanding of the process and the analysis
of the results:
TMA pulse:
2Al(CH3)3(g) + 3OH(s) → (O2)AlCH3(s) + O-Al(CH3)2(s) + 3CH4(g)
(1)
H2O pulse:
2H2O(g) + ∗ Al(CH3)2(s) → Al(OH)2(s) + 2CH4(g) (2)
H2O(g) + ∗ Al(CH3)(s) → AlOH(s) + CH4(g) (3)
The overall reaction for the whole ALD cycle is (Johnson
et al., 2014):
2Al(CH3)3(g) + 3H2O(g) → Al2O3 + 6CH4 (4)
The study
 of the transport phenomena inside the reactor
was performed with a preset deposition process recipe: the Ar
purging gas was set to an uninterrupted total ﬂow of 180 sccm
total (MFC standard conditions are 24 ◦C and 1 bar), consist-
ing of 100 sccm fed through the reactor top inlet as the main
reactor purge, 50 sccm fed through the load lock inlet as the
loading door purge, and 30 sccm fed through the side inlet of
the reactor,
 to serve as carrier gas for the reactants.
The
 side inlet tube and feeding system were heated to
150 ◦C. The substrate was heated to 300 ◦C, while the side walls
of
 the reactor were heated to 270 ◦C. This temperature is lower
than the substrate temperature, since the TMA molecule starts
to slowly decompose at temperature above 300 ◦C in the gas
phase. The temperature of the loading door wall connected to
the loading chamber
 system was measured at 36 ◦C. The top
and
 load lock Ar purging gas enters the reactor at 20 ◦C.
The opening times of the TMA and H2O vessels valves were
set to 25 ms and 60 ms, respectively, for the pulsing steps of
the process. The two pulsing times were separated by a 5 s Ar
purge
 time period. The base pressure of the process was set
to 50 mT orr, as measured by the Pirani gauge at the reactor
outlet. The base pressure measurement via the Pirani gauge
will be discussed in detail in Section 4.1 and Appendix B. The
operating conditions are summarized in Table 1.
3. Computational model formulation
3.1. Governing equations and model assumptions
The governing equations are the conservation of mass,
momentum, energy and chemical species, without any chem-
ical reaction. The equations of conservation of chemical
species include the Soret effect. They are all shown in
Appendix A. The gas is assumed ideal and the thermal con-
ductivity, dynamic viscosity, and diffusion coefﬁcients for
the chemical species are computed using the kinetic gas
theory. The Lennard-Jones parameters for the species are
obtained from the CHEMKIN-PRO database (CHEMKIN-PRO,
2013). The equations were discretized and solved using Com-
sol Multiphysics
®
, which uses the ﬁnite element method. A
quadratic basis function set was selected for the velocity and
the species mass fractions, while a linear basis function set
was used for temperature and pressure. Comsol Multiphysics
®

798 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. 2 – Computational mesh generated for: a) the ALD reactor model, b) the reactant feeding system.
Table 1 – Process conditions used for the ALD reactor.
Flow conditions
Carrier gas
 Ar ﬂow (through the feeding system and
side
 inlet
 of the reactor) (sccm)
30
To p
 inlet Ar ﬂow (sccm) 100
Load
 lock inlet Ar ﬂow (sccm) 50
Base pressure (as measured by Pirani gauge at the
outlet)
 (mT orr)
50
Thermal
 conditions
To p inlet temperature (◦C) 20
Side inlet tube—feeding system tubes temperature (◦C) 150
Load
 lock inlet temperature (◦C) 20
Reactor side walls temperature (◦C) 270
Substrate temperature (◦C) 300
Temperature
 measured at the loading door and loading
chamber connection (◦C)
36
Reactant
 bottles measured temperature(◦C) 28
ALD
 cycle conditions
TMA valve opening time (s) 0.025
TMA purge time (s) 5
H2O valve opening time (s) 0.060
H2O purge time (s) 5
was also used to generate the computational mesh for both
domains (reactor and feeding system). The mesh used for
the feeding system model consists of 35,246 tetrahedral ele-
ments and the mesh used for the ALD reactor model consists
of 149,226 tetrahedral elements. The computational mesh for
the two models is presented below, in Fig. 2.
3.2. Computational strategy and boundary conditions
A major difﬁculty in modelling the process under study is the
absence of data regarding the reactant pulses that are injected
into the ALD reactor during the exposure steps of the cycle, as
no measuring device is installed. As a consequence, the reac-
tant ﬂows were calculated using the feeding system model
and
 a strategy was developed to connect the models which
describe the feeding and the deposition parts of the ALD sys-
tem. This strategy is summarized in Fig. 3. At the ﬁrst step,
the steady ﬂow of Ar is simulated in the reactor. This is done
by using the ﬂow rates and temperatures of Table 1 as inlet
boundary conditions. The heating chuck on which the sub-
strate is placed, is accounted for via a heating ﬂux on the
substrate
 surface.
 This
 heating ﬂux is adjusted, so that the
center
 of the substrate (where the temperature controller is
situated) is set to the desired temperature i.e. 300 ◦C. An outlet
pressure boundary condition is set at the reactor outlet. This
pressure is taken equal to the base pressure of the ALD pro-
cess, measured by the capacitance manometer at the outlet,
controlled by the APC unit. The resulting pressure distribution
is used to simulate the feeding system.
The feeding system was ﬁrst simulated with the two valves
of the reactants vessels closed. This was done by using the
30 sccm of Ar (Table 1), serving as a carrier gas, as an inlet
boundary condition. An impermeable interface is used to
account for the closed ALD valves. The feeding system outlet,
connected to the side inlet of the reactor, was set to the pres-
sure computed for the side inlet in the previous step (constant
ﬂow of Ar inside the reactor). The gas volume in each vessel
above the liquid reactants is assumed to be half that of the bot-
tle, at a pressure equal to the vapor pressure of the respective
reactant at 28 ◦C; i.e. 1940 Pa (14.55 T orr) for TMA and 3820 Pa
(28.65 T orr) for H2O (NIST Chemistry WebBook, 2005).
The solution for the steady Ar ﬂow in the feeding system
is then used as an initial condition to simulate the reactant
exposure steps. This is done by removing the impermeable
interface
 corresponding to each reactant exposure and sim-
ulating the process for the valve opening time indicated in
Table 1. After the valve opening, the interface is set again and
the process is simulated until no more reactant is present in
the feeding system. This leads to the calculation of the reac-

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 799
Fig.
 3 – Schematic representation of the implemented computational strategy.
tant pulses during the ALD exposure steps. The computed
pulses are then implemented as a transient inlet condition to
the side inlet of the reactor model. The turbo-molecular vac-
uum pump sets the reactor outlet pressure. Since the pump
works under a constant volumetric ﬂow rate for a wide range
of
 pressures,
 the volumetric rate of the pumped reactants
remains constant during deposition. Consequently, a steady
volumetric ﬂow rate is set at the reactor outlet and coincides
with that of the steady Ar ﬂow in the reactor. Using the com-
puted pulses as inlet conditions and the computed constant
outlet ﬂow
 rate
 as an outlet condition, the ALD exposure steps
inside
 the reactor chamber are simulated.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Model predictions: steady ﬂow of Ar
4.1.1. V acuum pump and Pirani gauge simulation
As presented in the previous section, the starting point for
the computations is the base pressure of the ALD process. As
detailed in Section 2.1, it is measured by the Pirani gauge, a gas
dependent
 gauge that measures the pressure of a gas through
its thermal conductivity. In this case, the Pirani gauge used
is calibrated for nitrogen. T ypically, the pressure reading by
a Pirani gauge is multiplied by a correction factor, different
for each gas, in order to calibrate the measurements to the
real pressure value. In our case, these correction factors are
unknown. So, in order to compare the predicted values, Pcalc,
with the Pirani measurements, Pexp, we convert the former fol-
lowing Eq. (5), which accounts for the dependence, assumed
linear, of the pressure reading on the ratio of the thermal con-
ductivities of the gas mixture and nitrogen. This conversion
is then based on the principles of the Pirani gauge (indirect
measurement
 of pressure via the gas thermal conductivity),
with
 the assumption that the pressure measurement is lin-
early dependent on the thermal conductivity of the gas. The
converted value, denoted by Pconv is used for the compari-
son with the experimental measurements (Pexp). Although the
particular assumption is not validated for H2O or TMA, exper-
iments showed (see Appendix B) that it can be used for the
pure Ar ﬂow.
Pconv = Pcalc · kmixture
kNitrogen
(5)
where
 kmixture is the thermal conductivity of the gas mixture,
kNitrogen is the thermal conductivity of nitrogen, Pcalc is the
calculated pressure. Using the kinetic gas theory, the thermal
conductivity of pure nitrogen at the outlet temperature, i.e
270 ◦C, is estimated 0.041106 W/mK.
Eq. (5) is also used to transform the experimental pressure
measurements of the Pirani gauge to the real pressure value,
to be used as a model input for the base pressure of the ALD
process.
During the purging step of the reactor, the base pressure is
measured by the Pirani gauge at P = 50 mT orr; outlet pressure
measurements are shown in Appendix B. This value corre-
sponds
 to Pcalc = 72 mT orr (from Eq. (5)), imposed as outlet
boundary condition. The computed outlet volumetric ﬂow rate
is Qout = 57, 1255 L/s at the outlet temperature and pressure.
This value is set as outlet boundary condition when the tur-
bomolecular vacuum pump operates with a constant butterﬂy
valve opening. Using the previous solution as an initial esti-
mate for the next one, the total Ar ﬂow through the reactor
inlet is varied. Experiments were performed for the same con-
ditions, and the outlet pressure was measured by the Pirani
gauge. The comparison between the experimental measure-
ments and the model predictions, i.e. the converted values
(Pconv) obtained using Eq. (5), is shown in Fig. 4.
The
 good agreement between measurements and model
predictions
 with the conversion of Eq. (5) validates the treat-
ment of the vacuum pump operation by the model. The

800 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig.
 4 – Outlet
 pressure vs inlet Ar ﬂow rate: model predictions (line) and experimental measurements (dots).
resulting linear relation between the inlet Ar ﬂow and the
outlet pressure is as expected, considering that the volumet-
ric ﬂow
 rate
 of
 the pump remains constant within a pressure
range.
 From the results of Fig. 4, the gauge pressure conversion
by Eq. (5) is also validated for the case of pure Ar ﬂow.
4.1.2. Flow ﬁeld results
For the operating conditions of Table 1, the ﬂow ﬁeld inside the
reactor is shown in Fig. 5a. For comparison, in Fig. 5b is shown
the
 ﬂow
 ﬁeld at 30 sccm top inlet ﬂow. The velocity vectors are
plotted in a xy plane of the reactor, in z = 0, where symmetry
exists in our geometry in the z+ and z− coordinate.
A plug ﬂow develops inside the reactor chamber and close
to the substrate. An interesting result is the effect of the Ar
ﬂow entering from the loading door inlet. As Fig. 5a shows,
the loading door ﬂow is suppressed by the top inlet Ar ﬂow,
near the right edge of the substrate surface. If the top inlet
ﬂow rate of Ar is not high enough, the loading door Ar ﬂow
will affect the ﬂow and hence the species distribution on the
substrate surface, that could lead to non-uniform deposition.
This is shown in Fig. 5b, where the loading door inlet ﬂow
affects
 the ﬂow above the substrate surface, due to the lower
top inlet ﬂow rate. The side of the substrate exposed to the
loading door ﬂow will be purged more efﬁciently than the rest
of the substrate surface, leading to non-uniform species dis-
tribution on the substrate surface. The top and side inlet ﬂow
must be adjusted so that the loading door ﬂow does not affect
the ﬂow above the substrate surface.
4.2. Model predictions: substrate temperature
The predicted temperature ﬁeld in the reactor chamber and
the temperature proﬁle on the substrate are shown in Fig. 6,
using the conditions in Table 1.
Fig. 6a shows that the gas is quite isothermal into the reac-
tor with a temperature close to that of the walls (270 ◦C), except
near the inlet zones where it is colder and near the substrate
where it is hotter (300 ◦C). The substrate is not isothermal
(Fig. 6b), due to the cooling provided by the gas coming from
the vicinity of the reactor walls. The calculated temperature
on
 the substrate perimeter is equal to 289 ◦C. Results also show
the
 effect of the loading door purge. The Ar ﬂow entering the
reactor chamber at 20 ◦C lowers the temperature in the area
close the loading door (Fig. 6a) and at the nearby substrate side
(at
 279 ◦C). The temperature difference between the substrate
center and the loading door side reads 21 ◦C.
This
 temperature difference can impact the deposition pro-
cess in various ways. For example, it may affect the adsorption
of the species
 on the substrate. Lower temperature favors
adsorption of reactants on the loading door side of the sub-
strate. Reaction will also be slower on the colder side of the
substrate. Moreover, the minimum purging times required
to effectively purge the reactor depend on the temperature.
Lowering the temperature reduces the H2O adsorption rate
from the surfaces of the reactor and thus purging should last
longer (Groner et al., 2004). If the purging time is not long
enough, the subsequent TMA pulse will lead to non-ideal,
CVD-like reactions on the loading door side of the substrate,
as TMA will react with adsorbed H2O molecules on the sub-
strate surface. An experimental study (Henn-Lecordier et al.,
2011b) has shown
 the effect of an excess H2O pulse on the
thickness
 uniformity in a cross-ﬂow reactor, with increased
purging times needed to desorb the remaining adsorbed H2O.
This situation is enhanced at low process temperature, where
the surface reactions are slower and highly dependent on
the surface temperature. The surface temperature gradient
can also affect the number of hydroxyl active sites present
on the substrate (Puurunen, 2005). Ultimately, it may lead
non-uniform ﬁlm thickness. In addition, the deposition tem-
perature affects the composition and density of the ﬁlm
(Groner et al., 2004).
4.3. Model predictions: feeding system
As described in Section 3.2 the pure Ar ﬂow simulation in the
ALD reactor, is followed by the simulation of the feeding sys-
tem. It uses the pressure computed at the reactor side inlet as
an outlet pressure condition. This pressure, computed to be
142
 mT orr, is set as the outlet pressure, and the Ar ﬂow is sim-
ulated inside the feeding system, with both of the ALD valves
closed. In Fig. 7, we present the pressure and the TMA mole
fraction distribution inside the feeding system, with the valves
closed.
Once
 the result has been obtained for the ﬂow inside the
feeding system with the valves closed, it is used as an initial
condition for the pulsing steps simulations. The impermeable

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 801
Fig. 5 – a) Flow ﬁeld predictions for the process parameters of Table 1, b) ﬂow ﬁeld predictions at 30 sccm top inlet ﬂow.
Fig. 6 – a) Temperature ﬁeld inside the reactor chamber, b) temperature proﬁle on the substrate surface for the substrate
center at 300 ◦C.
Fig.
 7 – Feeding system simulation results for the pure Ar ﬂow, with the ALD valves closed: a) pressure distribution, b) TMA
mole fraction distribution.

802 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. 8 – Feeding system model results for the TMA and H2O reactant pulses: a) ﬂow rate, b) molar fraction averaged at the
feeding system outlet.
Fig. 9 – Outlet pressure variation vs time: model predictions vs Pirani gauge measurements.
interface that approximates the ALD valve for each reactant
is removed for each pulsing step respectively. When the valve
closes, the impermeable interface is re-set, until all remaining
reactant species are removed from the feeding system. The
total ﬂow rate and the average mole fraction are obtained at
the feeding system outlet. As the outlet of the feeding sys-
tem is connected to the side inlet of the ALD reactor, these
values will serve as time-dependent inlet conditions for the
reactor side inlet, thus simulating the ALD reactant exposure
steps. The ﬂow rates calculated by the feeding system will be
used as an inlet condition for the Navier–Stokes and continu-
ity equations in the reactor model, whereas the mole fractions
will be used as an input to the chemical species conservation
equation.
Fig.
 8 presents the calculated TMA and H2O pulses as a
function of time, in terms of ﬂow rate (Fig. 8a) and averaged
molar fraction (Fig. 8b) at the feeding system outlet.
Results of Fig. 8a show a higher ﬂow rate for H2O than for
TMA for the whole duration of the pulse, leading to an overall
higher quantity of the delivered H2O. This is attributed to the
higher vapor pressure of H2O inside the reactant bottles and to
the longer opening time of the ALD valve above the H2O bottle
(60 ms and 25 ms for H2O and TMA, respectively). It is noted
that the initial and ﬁnal values of the outlet ﬂow rate of the
feeding system after the reactant pulses are 30 sccm, equal to
the Ar carrier gas ﬂow.
As shown in Fig. 8b, the reactant molar fraction is substan-
tial during both pulses, whereas Ar represents only roughly
10 wt% of the gas mixture. Notably, it is predicted that
although the H2O valve opening time is longer and the quan-
tity of H2O entering the feeding system is higher, the TMA
molecules evacuate the feeding system slower, i.e the feed-
ing system takes more time to purge. This is attributed to the
slower diffusion rate in N2 of TMA compared to H2O, since the
molecules of the former are bigger and heavier than the latter.
However, the feeding system is purged from both reactants in
0.3 s. The total calculated amounts entering the reactor are
0.63 mg for TMA and 0.408 mg for H2O.
4.4. Model predictions: ALD exposure steps
4.4.1. Outlet pressure variation
The predicted outlet pressure with the Pirani conversion
(Pconv) variation during three ALD cycles is shown in Fig. 9 and
is compared with the experimental measurements.
As
 shown in Fig. 9, the model predictions for the pressure
variation at the reactor outlet are in good agreement with mea-
surements. In particular, the outlet peak heights are captured

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 803
Fig. 10 – Snapshots of the ﬂow ﬁeld developed during the TMA exposure, inside the reactor chamber: a) 10 ms, b) 20 ms, c)
30
 ms, d) 60 ms, after the start of the TMA exposure.
and thus the dynamic response to the reactant pulses. This
validates the coupling of the two CFD models.
Regarding the peak widths, it is noticed that the predic-
tions slightly underestimate the time needed to restore the
system to its base pressure for the H2O pulse. As the pressure
reading given by the Pirani gauge is gas dependent, it will vary
with the gas composition. The pressure reading is performed
via the measurement of the gas thermal conductivity, which is
inversely proportional to the molecular mass of the gas. As the
gauge is calibrated for nitrogen, a gas with a higher molecular
mass than N2 (28 g/mol) will lead to a lower pressure read-
ing, while a gas with a lower molecular mass will have the
opposite effect. During the H2O exposure, the surface kinetics
plays a role on the pressure reading. H2O molecules, despite
chemisorbing on the substrate surface, can also adsorb on the
reactor walls. Due to their polar nature, they stick strongly
on the reactor walls, and take time to desorb. Therefore, the
time needed for their desorption is signiﬁcant and the corre-
sponding purging time will be higher than for TMA. This is
evident from the measured pressure peaks for the H2O expo-
sure. The pressure at the outlet takes more time to restore
to its initial value. Thus, the larger width of the H2O mea-
sured pressure peak at the reactor outlet is attributed to the
adsorption/desorption of H2O molecules on the reactor walls.
4.4.2. TMA exposure
As shown in Fig. 8, the TMA pulse entering the reactor reaches
a peak above 400 sccm. Due to the high molecular mass of
TMA, a high momentum pulse will enter the reactor chamber
through the side inlet, leading to a disturbance of the ﬂow
ﬁeld. As the ﬂow rate entering the reactor is time dependent,
the resulting ﬂow ﬁeld inside the reactor main volume will be
affected
 during the exposure steps of the process. Snapshots
of the ﬂow ﬁeld at different time instants, during the TMA
exposure are shown in Fig. 10.

804 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. 11 – Snapshots of TMA concentration proﬁles on the substrate surface, scales in mol/m3: a) 20 ms, b) 30 ms, c) 60 ms, d)
80
 ms, e) 100 ms, f) 200 ms, after the start of the TMA pulse.
Results show a recirculation inside the reactor, during the
ﬁrst ms of the TMA exposure step. Notably, one recirculation
area is located in the gas phase above the substrate, while a
second one near the reactor top inlet. After 60 ms, the TMA
pulse stops (Fig. 10d), and the recirculation disappears. The
predicted ﬂow ﬁeld and, in particular, the recirculation above
the substrate, can have a signiﬁcant effect on the gaseous
species distribution inside the reactor chamber and then on
their distribution on the substrate.
In Fig. 11, snapshots of the TMA concentration proﬁles on
the substrate surface are plotted. The scale for each snapshot
is
 different for the sake of clarity.
A non-uniform TMA concentration proﬁle appears on the
substrate, during the TMA exposure. The TMA concentra-
tion proﬁle on the substrate evolves along with the gas ﬂow
ﬁeld inside the reactor chamber. While a recirculation exists
in the gas phase (0–40 ms, snapshots a–c, Fig. 10), the TMA
concentration reaches a maximum between the substrate cen-
ter and the loading door side of the substrate, as shown in
Fig. 11a and b. Notably, 20 ms after the start of the TMA
pulse, the maximum concentration computed on the sub-
strate exceeds 7 × 10−4 mol/m3,while the minimum value is
seven
 times smaller, i.e 1 × 10−4 mol/m3 (Fig. 9a), leading to
a concentration difference of 93%. The maximum and min-
imum values are 9 × 10−4 and 3 × 10−4 mol/m3 respectively,
after 30 ms. As the side inlet ﬂow rate establishes to its initial
value of 30 sccm, the maximum moves to the center of the sub-
strate, as shown in Fig. 11c. At that point the concentrations
are lower by two orders of magnitude, compared to the previ-
ous time snapshots. The maximum value is 5.8 × 10−6 mol/m3
and the minimum is below 5 × 10−6 mol/m3—a difference of
16.3%. It is noted that while the side inlet ﬂow rate is higher,
the loading door purging ﬂow is suppressed to an area beneath
the substrate surface. However, once the ﬂow rate establishes
to
 its initial value, the loading door purge starts gaining inﬂu-
ence on the species distribution on the substrate surface, as
seen in Fig. 11c.
For the time period between 60 ms to 200 ms after the start
of the TMA pulse, snapshots 9d to 9f show that while the
ﬂow ﬁeld is established, the gas mixture entering the reac-
tor through the side inlet still contains TMA, which will ﬂow
inside the reactor chamber. During this period, the loading
door purge affects the concentration of TMA above the sub-
strate surface. As shown in Fig. 11d and e, the loading door Ar
ﬂow purges the side of the substrate exposed to it. The loading
door
 side of the substrate is exposed to a lower TMA con-

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 805
Fig. 12 – Integral over time of the TMA ﬂux on the substrate surface, scale in mol/m2, during the whole TMA exposure.
centration during the whole TMA exposure step after 60 ms
from
 the start of the TMA pulse. The concentrations remain
in
 the same order of magnitude as in Fig. 11c. The maximum
concentration difference is 15.3% for Fig. 11d and 15.6% for
Fig. 11e.
After 200 ms, the side inlet ﬂow consists of Ar only. During
the remaining purging time, the reactor chamber is purged
from the remaining TMA molecules. The ﬂow ﬁeld is estab-
lished and the resulting concentration proﬁle on the substrate
is
 shown in Fig. 11f. This species distribution proﬁle remains
constant during the remaining purging time of the process.
As Fig. 11 shows, the TMA concentrations on the substrate
during the ﬁrst ms of the TMA exposure (Fig. 11a, b) are sig-
niﬁcantly
 higher than the
 concentrations at the next time
snapshots
 (Fig. 11c–f). In order to analyze the exposure of the
substrate to TMA molecules, we have calculated the species
ﬂux on the substrate surface, using the Hertz-Knudsen equa-
tion, in terms of mol/m2s:
Fluxi = pi√
2/EMMRT
(6)
The above species ﬂux is integrated over the whole TMA
exposure and purging time of the ALD cycle. The resulting
exposure of the substrate to TMA molecules is plotted in
Fig. 12.
The TMA ﬂux integral over time is not uniform; it has a
maximum between the substrate center and the loading door
side. This corresponds to the concentration proﬁles on the
substrate during the TMA pulse, when the recirculation in
the gas phase exists, as shown in Fig. 11a and b. This means
that the majority of the substrate exposure to TMA occurs
during the ﬁrst ms of the TMA pulse. The computed maxi-
mum exposure difference on the substrate surface during the
TMA exposure is 10.7%. The predicted exposure difference
across the substrate surface can lead to deposited ﬁlm non-
uniformity, especially if the rate limiting step of the process is
mass transfer toward the substrate, i.e at high temperatures.
However, if the species ﬂux is higher than the ﬂux required to
cover all available reactive sites, the substrate surface will be
saturated and the deposited ﬁlm will be uniform.
4.4.3. H2O exposure
Snapshots of the gas ﬂow ﬁeld inside the reactor during the
H2O exposure are shown in Fig. 13.
During the H2O pulse, as a high ﬂow rate enters the reac-
tor chamber, a recirculation is again predicted near the reactor
inlet. Another recirculation is located below the side inlet tube
connection to the main volume of the reactor (Fig. 13a, b). The
recirculation is less signiﬁcant for H2O than for TMA, and no
recirculation appears above the substrate, contrary to the TMA
pulse,
 despite
 the fact that the ﬂow rate entering the reac-
tor
 is higher than during the TMA pulse (Fig. 8a). After 60 ms
(Fig. 13c), the recirculation disappears, while a high ﬂow rate
is still entering the reactor. The side inlet ﬂow rate returns to
its initial value (Fig. 8a) after 120 ms, and the ﬂow ﬁeld inside
the chamber establishes to its initial condition.
The effect of the ﬂow on the species distribution on the
substrate is shown in Fig. 14, where snapshots of the H2O con-
centration proﬁle are presented. The scale for each snapshot
is different, as before.
During the ﬁrst ms of the H2O pulse, the high ﬂow rate com-
ing
 from the side inlet of the reactor suppresses the loading
door purging ﬂow, thus leading to a concentration proﬁle with
a maximum at the substrate center (Fig. 14a). At this snap-
shot, the maximum concentration is 4.7 × 10−4 mol/m3 and
the minimum 3.03 × 10−4 mol/m3, leading to a maximum con-
centration difference of 35.5%, As the ﬂow rate from the side
inlet decreases, the loading door purge inﬂuences the species
distribution, thus leading to a constantly lower H2O concentra-
tion on the loading door side of the substrate, which is exposed
to the purging gas. This gradual effect is shown in Fig. 14b–e.
Fig. 14b and c corresponds to results obtained for a high side
inlet ﬂow rate due to the H2O pulse. However, the momentum
of this ﬂow is not high enough to suppress the loading door Ar
ﬂow effect. The maximum concentration differences at these
snapshots are 26.6% and 17.65% for Fig. 14b and c, respec-
tively. Fig. 14d and e correspond to results obtained while the
side inlet ﬂow rate has established to its initial value, how-
ever the gas entering the side inlet still has an amount of
water. The maximum concentration difference is 8.7% and
4.5%, respectively; the concentration minimum is located at
the loading door side of the substrate. The H2O concentration

806 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. 13 – Snapshots of the ﬂow ﬁeld inside the reactor chamber: a) 10 ms, b) 20 ms, c) 60 ms, d) 200 ms after the start of the
H2O pulse.
proﬁle on the substrate during the purging step of the reactor
is shown in Fig. 14f; the remaining water is removed from the
chamber.
From
 the predictions in Fig. 14 is concluded that during the
ﬁrst ms of the H2O pulse, the values of the H2O concentrations
on the substrate surface are of the same order of magnitude,
unlike the TMA pulse, where it took 30 ms for an almost full
substrate surface exposure to TMA. It is also noted that the
overall H2O concentrations are higher than in the TMA case.
As done before, Eq. (6) is integrated over the whole duration
of the H2O exposure and purge, to yield the total exposure
presented in Fig. 15.
The computed time integral of the species ﬂux shows a
non-uniform exposure of the substrate surface to H2O. A lower
exposure
 is observed on the loading door side of the sub-
strate,
 while a maximum is calculated on the opposite side.
The maximum total exposure difference is 6.7%. This value
is lower than the corresponding value for the TMA exposure.
The above result shows a signiﬁcant effect of the loading door
purge on the gaseous H2O species distribution near the sub-
strate. The loading door side of the substrate is exposed to
6.7% less H2O molecules than the opposite side. Under ALD
conditions, if the H2O exposure is not high enough to saturate
the surface, a non-uniform ﬁlm will be deposited, with a lower
ﬁlm thickness being deposited on the loading door side. With
the mechanism presented in Section 2.2, two TMA molecules
would need three H2O molecules to fully remove the methyl
ligands. This means that the ratio between the H2O and TMA
exposure should be at least 1.5. The ratio between the H2O and
TMA exposures exceeds this value. However, this is only a ﬁrst
approach,
 since the kinetics of the reactants chemisorption
are
 not considered.

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 807
Fig. 14 – Snapshots of the H2O concentration proﬁle on the substrate surface, scales in mol/m3: a) 20 ms, b) 30 ms, c) 60 ms,
d) 100 ms, e) 120 ms, f) 200 ms after the start of the H2O pulse.
4.5. Model predictions: purging time
The whole ALD exposures and purging steps were simulated
for one complete cycle. As Ar ﬂows constantly into the cham-
ber,
 the substrate is exposed to reactant molecules even during
the purging steps. In order to study the purging efﬁciency of
the reactor, the maximum reactant mole fraction inside the
whole chamber was traced during the ALD pulses and purging
steps of the ALD cycle, as detailed in Fig. 16, for both reactants.
As expected, the maximum mole fraction inside the cham-
ber during the ﬁrst stages of the exposure time is close to
1, as the computed reactant pulses have a high reactant
composition (Fig. 8b). After the reactant pulses, the maxi-
mum mole fraction quickly drops, as the reactor purging step
begins.
In order to calculate a minimum purging time, we assumed
that when the maximum reactant mole fraction inside the
ALD reactor drops below a threshold, here taken 10−6, the
reactor is purged. The obtained results are 2.7 s for TMA and
3.1 s for H2O. Let us recall that these results are obtained by
simulating only the transport of chemical species inside the
reactor. In order to get a more reliable value for the purging
time, chemical reaction kinetics and adsorption/desorption of
species on the reactor walls must be taken into account. The
reactions
 must be given enough time to saturate the surface,
while the by-products must desorb and diffuse away from the
substrate surface, and be removed from the ALD chamber via
convection and diffusion. The species also adsorb on the reac-
tor walls and the time needed for their desorption contributes
to the total purging time. Especially for the H2O molecules,
the
 
slow
 desorption from the reactor walls can signiﬁcantly

808 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. 15 – Integral over time of the H2O ﬂux on the substrate surface, during the whole H2O exposure and purge, scale in
mol/m2.
Fig. 16 – Time evolution of the maximum reactant mole fraction inside the reactor chamber.
affect the purging time, especially under low temperature con-
ditions.
 Hence, the present model results can provide valuable
information regarding the purging efﬁciency of the reactor
in terms of gas species transport inside the chamber. How-
ever, an efﬁcient minimum purge time will only be predicted
when the above described physicochemical phenomena will
be incorporated in the model.
5. Conclusion
A three-dimensional Computational Fluid Dynamics model
for a commercial ALD reactor, depositing aluminum oxide
(Al2O3) from TMA and H2O on 20 cm substrates was con-
structed. As a ﬁrst step towards the understanding of the ALD
process,
 a model aiming to investigate the transport phenom-
ena inside
 the reactor chamber was developed in transient
conditions without considering any surface reaction.
As the reactant pulses entering the reactor are unknown,
a second CFD model was developed for the reactant feeding
system. The two models were coupled via a computational
scheme tailored to the limited availability of experimental
measurements, and the ALD process was simulated by imple-
menting
 the experimental conditions as boundary and initial
conditions to the respective partial differential equations. The
coupling between the two CFD models was validated by com-
parison with the experimentally measured outlet pressure.
The present work shows that the design of an ALD reactor
should integrate the detailed study of the transport phenom-
ena, including the effect of the reactor geometry, in order to
optimize the design of its various parts. In our case, the reac-
tor geometry strongly affects the temperature distribution via
the existence of the loading door. A low temperature zone is
present
 at the loading door that modiﬁes the temperature on
the substrate surface. This zone also affects the species distri-
bution on the surface, as it was revealed for the case of H2O.
The side inlet of the reactor, due to its smaller diameter, leads
to high velocity ﬂows during the TMA pulse causing a recircu-
lation
 in the gas phase above the substrate, which seriously
affects the TMA species distribution on the surface. These
non-ideal behaviors are all associated with the reactor geom-
etry.
 The need for CFD analysis to optimize the geometrical
setup of the reactor is therefore crucial.

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 809
The process conditions can also be optimized. It was shown
that a higher top inlet Ar ﬂow reduces the effect of the load-
ing door Ar ﬂow. The 100 sccm top inlet ﬂow indicated by the
recipe was not strong enough to suppress the loading door
effect. Furthermore, heating of the loading door walls to a
temperature equal to the reactor walls would lead to a more
uniform temperature proﬁle on the substrate and in the reac-
tor chamber, even this would enhance the deposition on the
loading door walls. Regarding
 the reactant distribution on the
substrate,
 the pulse times for each reactant should be long
enough to saturate the whole surface, to ensure that no more
reactants can be chemisorbed, given the self-terminating
nature of the reactions. This would lead to highly uniform
ﬁlms, not dependent on the gas phase reactant species dis-
tribution.
 However, as this optimal reactant dose depends on
reaction kinetics, and hence on temperature, the temperature
distribution on the substrate will affect again the uniformity
of deposition.
More precise conclusions and quantitative results about
the effect of process parameters on the quality and uniformity
of the ﬁlm can be drawn by including the surface chemistry,
which
 is the
 subject of an ongoing research work.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly funded by a T oulouse Tech Inter Lab 2016
grant. GPG acknowledges the ﬁnancial support provided by the
NTUA Research Committee.
Appendix A.
a) Continuity equation:
∂/SUB
∂t + ∇ · (/SUBu) = 0 (A1)
where /H9267 is the mass density of the gas mixture, and u the
velocity.
b) Momentum
 equation:
∂(/SUBu)
∂t + ∇ · (/SUBuu) = −∇P + ∇ · [/SYN(∇u + ∇uT) − /SYN2
3 (∇ · u)I] + /SUBg
(A2)
where P is the pressure, /H9262 the viscosity, I the unit tensor and
g the gravity acceleration.
c) Energy equation:
Cp
∂(/SUBT)
∂t + Cp∇ · (/SUBuT) = ∇ · (k∇T) −
n∑
i=1
ji · ∇Hi
Mi
(A3)
where Cp is the speciﬁc heat of the gas mixture, T the temper-
ature and k the thermal conductivity, n the number of species,
ji is the diffusion ﬂux, Hi is the enthalpy of formation, and M
is
 the molecular weight of species i.
d) Species transport equation
∂(/SUBϖi)
∂t + ∇ · (/SUBuϖ i) = −∇ · ji (A4)
where ϖ i is the mass fraction of the i species in the gas phase.
The diffusion ﬂux is calculated:
ji = −/SUBϖi
n−1∑
k=1
Dik
[
∇xk + (xk − ϖ k) ∇p
p
]
− DT,i
∇T
T (A5)
where Dik is the Maxwell Stefan Diffusion coefﬁcient. Eq. (A5)
is an expression of Fick’s law, including the Soret effect, for
constant mixture composition. The thermal diffusion coefﬁ-
cients are calculated using the following equation:
DT,i = −2.59
 · 10−7T0.659
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
M0.511
i xi
n∑
i=1
M0.511
i xi
− ϖ i
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
·
⎡
⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣
n∑
i=1
M0.511
i xi
n∑
i=1
M0.489
i xi
⎤
⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦
(A6)
The set of equations is then completed with the ideal gas
law,
pi = ciRT (A7)
where ci is the species concentration, and R the ideal gas con-
stant.
Appendix B.
The experimental reactor outlet pressure was monitored via
the
 Pirani gauge during various ALD cycles, as deposition took
place. The resulting pressure peaks are depicted in Fig. B1.
It shows that the base pressure of the process i.e the sys-
tem pressure during the purge step of the ALD cycle, is set
at 50 mT orr, measured via the Pirani gauge.
As presented in Section 3.2, the starting point for the calcu-
lations is the base pressure of the ALD process, measured via
the Pirani gauge, which is a gas dependent gauge that mea-
sures the pressure of a gas through its thermal conductivity.
The
 thermal conductivity is in turn an inverse function of the
molecular mass of the gas species. In our system, the Pirani
gauge is calibrated for nitrogen (N2), while the inert gas used
for the ALD process is Ar. T ypically, the pressure reading by
a Pirani gauge is multiplied by a correction factor, different
for each gas, in order to calibrate the measurements to the
real
 pressure value. In our case, these correction factors are
unknown. In order to have a value for the correction factor
of Ar, the reactor outlet pressure was measured, for a vary-
ing Ar inlet, using a constant butterﬂy valve opening at the
outlet. Both the Pirani gauge and the capacitance manome-
ter were active during these measurements, and the relation
between their readings is linear as shown in Fig. B2. The
capacitance manometer shows the true pressure inside the
chamber, while the Pirani gauge reading needs to be mul-
tiplied by a correction factor, equal to the slope of the line
that connects the measured points. The slope of the line is
equal
 to 1.4203, a value very close to the ratio of the ther-
mal conductivities of nitrogen and Ar (1.4401), as computed
using the kinetic gas theory at the outlet temperature, i.e.
270 ◦C.
As during deposition the reactants can deposit on all the
surfaces inside the reactor chamber, the isolation valve for
the capacitance manometer is kept closed during the ALD
cycles, and the pressure is monitored via the Pirani gauge.

810 Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811
Fig. B1 – Experimental outlet pressure monitoring during various ALD cycles, as measured by the Pirani gauge.
Fig. B2 – Comparison between pressure readings by capacitance manometer and Pirani gauge.
As the outlet pressure is the only available measurement to
compare with the CFD model predictions, the latter must be
corrected
 so that the results can be compared to the Pirani
gauge measurements. We assume that as the gauge is cali-
brated for nitrogen, the pressure indicated by the Pirani gauge
will depend on the ratio of the thermal conductivities of the
gas mixture and nitrogen. Hence, the calculated pressure Pcalc
is converted by Eq. (5), presented in Section 4.1. Eq. (5) is used
to transform the model predictions for the pressure to a value
(Pconv) to be compared with the Pirani gauge measurements.
Although the above assumption is not validated for H2O or
TMA, experimental measurements of Fig. B2 show that it can
be used for the Ar ﬂow. However, we use the same assumption
for the reactants, as it is the only way to compare the outlet
measurements with the model predictions.
References
CHEMKIN-PRO 15131, Reaction Design: San Diego, 2013.
Delabie,
 A., Sioncke, S., Rip, J., Van Elshocht, S., Pourtois, G.,
Mueller,
 M., Beckhoff, B., Pierloot, K., 2012. Reaction
mechanisms
 for atomic layer deposition of aluminum oxide
on
 semiconductor substrates. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A: Vac. Surf.
Films
 30 (1), 01A127.
Deng, Z., He, W. , Duan, C., Shan, B., Chen, R., 2016. Atomic layer
deposition
 process optimization by computational ﬂuid
dynamics.
 Vacuum 123, 103–110.
Dillon, A.C., Ott, A.W ., Way, J.D., George, S.M., 1995. Surface
chemistry
 of Al2O3 deposition using Al(CH3)3 and H2O in a
binary
 reaction sequence. Sur. Sci. 322 (1–3), 230–242.
Elam, J.W., Groner, M.D., George, S.M., 2002. Viscous ﬂow reactor
with
 quartz crystal microbalance for thin ﬁlm growth by
atomic
 layer deposition. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 73 (8), 2981.

Chemical Engineering Research and Design 1 3 2 ( 2 0 1 8 ) 795–811 811
Elliott, S., Greer, J., 2004. Simulating the atomic layer deposition
of
 alumina from ﬁrst principles. J. Mater. Chem. 14 (21),
3246–3250.
Ferguson, J.D., Weimer, A.W ., George, S.M., 2000. Atomic layer
deposition
 of ultrathin and conformal Al2O3 ﬁlms on BN
particles.
 Thin Solid Films 371 (1), 95–104.
George, S.M., 2010. Atomic layer deposition: an overview. Chem.
Rev.
 110 (1), 111–131.
Gobbert, M.K., Prasad, V. , Cale, T. S. , 2002. Predictive modeling of
atomic layer deposition on the feature scale. Thin Solid Films
410
 (1–2),
 129–141.
Groner, M.D., Fabreguette, F .H., Elam, J.W., George, S.M., 2004.
Low-temperature Al2O3 atomic layer deposition. Chem. Mater.
16
 (4), 639–645.
Henn-Lecordier, L., Anderle, M., Robertson, E., Rubloff, G.W .,
2011a.
 Impact of parasitic reactions on wafer-scale uniformity
in
 water-based and ozone-based atomic layer deposition. J.
Vac.
 Sci. Technol. A: Vac. Surf. Films 29 (5), 051509.
Henn-Lecordier, L., Anderle, M., Robertson, E., Rubloff, G.W .,
2011b.
 Impact of parasitic reactions on wafer-scale uniformity
in
 water-based and ozone-based atomic layer deposition. J.
Vac.
 Sci. Technol. A: Vac. Surf. Films 29 (5), 051509.
Higashi, G.S., Fleming, C.G., 1989. Sequential surface chemical
reaction
 limited growth of high quality Al2O3 dielectrics. Appl.
Phys.
 Lett. 55 (19), 1963–1965.
Johnson, R.W ., Hultqvist, A., Bent, S.F ., 2014. A brief review of
atomic
 layer deposition: from fundamentals to applications.
Mater.
 T oday
 17 (5), 236–246.
Li, M.Y ., Chang, Y. Y. , Wu, H.C., Huang, C.S., Chen, J.C., Lue, J.L.,
Chang,
 S.M., 2007. Effect of process pressure on atomic layer
deposition
 of Al2O3. J. Electrochem. Soc. 154 (11), H967–H972.
Mazaleyrat, G., Estève, A., Jeloaica, L., Djafari-Rouhani, M., 2005. A
methodology
 for the kinetic Monte Carlo simulation of
alumina
 atomic layer deposition onto silicon. Comput. Mater.
Sci.
 33 (1–3), 74–82.
Mousa, M.B.M., Oldham, C.J., Jur, J.S., Parsons, G.N., 2012. Effect of
temperature
 and gas velocity on growth per cycle during
Al2O3 and ZnO atomic layer deposition at atmospheric
pressure.
 J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A: Vac. Surf. Films 30 (1), 01A155.
NIST Chemistry WebBook, 2005. NIST Standard Reference
Database
 Number 69. National Institute of Standards and
Technology,
 Gaithersburg, MD, USA, Available online:
http://webbook.nist.gov.
Ott,
 A.W ., Klaus, J.W., Johnson, J.M., George, S.M., 1997. Al3O3 thin
ﬁlm
 growth on Si(100) using binary reaction sequence
chemistry.
 Thin Solid Films 292 (1–2), 135–144.
Pan, D., Ma, L., Xie, Y. , Jen, T .C., Yuan, C., 2015a. On the physical
and
 chemical details of alumina atomic layer deposition: a
combined experimental and numerical approach. J. Vac. Sci.
Technol.
 A: Vac. Surf. Films 33 (2), 021511.
Pan, D., Ma, L., Xie, Y. , Wang, F. , Jen, T .-C., Yuan, C., 2015b.
Experimental and numerical investigations into the transient
multi-wafer
 batch atomic layer deposition process with
vertical and horizontal wafer arrangements. Int. J. Heat Mass
Transf.
 91, 416–427.
Pan, D., Jen, T .-C., Yuan, C., 2016. Effects of gap size, temperature
and
 pumping pressure on the ﬂuid dynamics and chemical
kinetics
 of in-line spatial atomic layer deposition of Al2O3. Int.
J.
 Heat Mass Transf. 96, 189–198.
Puurunen, R.L., 2005. Surface chemistry of atomic layer
deposition:
 a case study for the trimethylaluminum/water
process.
 J. Appl. Phys. 97 (12), 121301.
Salami, H., Poissant, A., Adomaitis, R.A., 2017. Anomalously high
alumina atomic layer deposition growth per cycle during
trimethylaluminum
 under-dosing conditions. J. Vac. Sci.
Technol.
 A: Vac. Surf. Films 35 (1), 01B101.
Shaeri, M.R., Jen, T .-C., Yuan, C.Y ., 2004. Improving atomic layer
deposition
 process through reactor scale simulation. Int. J.
Heat
 Mass Transf. 78, 1243–1253.
Shaeri, M.R., Jen, T .-C., Yuan, C.Y ., Behnia, M., 2015. Investigating
atomic
 layer deposition characteristics in multi-outlet viscous
ﬂow
 reactors through reactor scale simulations. Int. J. Heat
Mass
 Transf. 89, 480–481.
Travis, C.D., Adomaitis, R.A., 2013. Modeling ALD surface reaction
and
 process dynamics using absolute reaction rate theory.
Chem.
 Vap. Depos. 19 (1–3), 4–14.
Travis, C.D., Adomaitis, R.A., 2014. Modeling alumina atomic layer
deposition reaction kinetics during the trimethylaluminum
exposure.
 Theor. Chem. Acc. 133 (1), 3–11.
Weckman,
 T. ,
 Laasonen,
 K., 2015. First principles study of the
atomic layer
 deposition of alumina by TMA-H2O-process.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17 (26), 17322–17334.
Widjaja, Y. , Musgrave, C.B., 2002. Quantum chemical study of the
mechanism
 of aluminum oxide atomic layer deposition. Appl.
Phys.
 Lett. 80 (18), 3304–3306.
Wind, R.A., George, S.M., 2010. Quartz crystal microbalance
studies
 of Al2O3 atomic layer deposition using
trimethylaluminum
 and water at 125 ◦C. J. Phys. Chem. A 114
(3),
 1281–1289.
Xenidou, T .C., Prud’Homme, N., Vahlas, C., Markatos, N.C.,
Boudouvis,
 A.G., 2010. Reaction and transport interplay in Al
MOCVD
 investigated through experiments and computational
ﬂuid
 dynamic analysis. J. Electrochem. Soc. 157 (12),
D633–D641.
Xie, Y. , Ma, L., Pan, D., Yuan, C., 2015. Mechanistic modeling of
atomic
 layer deposition of alumina process with detailed
surface
 chemical kinetics. Chem. Eng. J. 259, 213–220.
Xie, Y. , Pan, D., Ma, L., Yuan, C., 2016. Optimizing the process
efﬁciency
 of atomic layer deposition of alumina for its
sustainability
 improvement: a combined experimental and
modeling
 study. J. Clean. Prod. 133, 338–347.
Zahi, I., Mur, P. , Blaise, P. , Estève, A., Rouhani, M.D., Vergnes, H.,
Caussat,
 B., 2010. Multi-scale modelling of silicon nanocrystal
synthesis
 by low pressure chemical vapor deposition. Thin
Solid
 Films 519 (22), 7650–7658.