Initial Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Atomic Layer Deposition onto SiO 2 Surfaces: Density
Functional Theory Calculations
Zheng Hu and C. Heath Turner*
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Uni Versity of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama 35487
Recei Ved: January 18, 2006; In Final Form: March 2, 2006
We present a density functional theory (DFT) study of the initial surface reactions of TiO 2 deposition onto
a SiO 2 substrate using atomic layer deposition (ALD). The precursors for the deposition process were chosen
to be TiCl 4 and H 2 O, and several cluster models were used for the SiO 2 substrate. We predict the activation
barriers, transition states, and reaction pathways of the surface reactions, and we investigate the effect of
surface heterogeneity (such as the presence of siloxane bridges) on the reactivity of the SiO2 surface. Our
study suggests that the concentration and arrangement of different reactive groups on the substrate will strongly
dictate the process of film growth during ALD, including the film morphology and the growth rate.
1. Introduction
Two of the most critical issues currently facing the semi-
conductor industry are the discovery of high-  gate dielectric
replacement materials for SiO 2 and the development of deposi-
tion processes that achieve high surface uniformity and con-
trolled growth at the atomic scale.1 Atomic layer deposition
(ALD) is an ideal candidate for meeting these challenges,
enabling thin film growth on various surfaces, ranging from
planar substrates to nanoporous materials. The deposition can
occur uniformly or may also be patterned on surfaces to create
quantum dots (with potential applications as memory devices)
or to facilitate the patterning of subsequent layers, such as Cu
on a glass substrate.2 Although ALD was introduced nearly 30
years ago, its utility is growing significantly as desired film
thicknesses are shrinking in the electronic materials industry.
Valuable film properties, such as excellent conformality,
uniformity, and controllability obtained with this technique are
now beginning to outweigh the inherent drawback of low
deposition rates.
Research groups around the world have just recently begun
exploring the properties and potential applications of ALD
processing. For instance, within the last year, King and
co-workers3,4 have found that ALD films have enormous
potential for attaining high performance photonic crystal
structures and optical microcavities. The performance benefits
are credited to the highly conformal and uniform coatings
achieved during the deposition process. Others have begun
experimenting with nanolaminated thin films, synthesized by
using alternating precursors during the ALD process.5 These
atomically detailed films have been shown to possess superior
characteristics for high- gate-oxide materials, which are
commonly used in metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect
transistors (MOSFETs). There is a huge market potential for
the application of ALD processing to microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS), due to the precision attainable with this
technique. In contrast to the other techniques tested, ALD allows
highly conformal coatings to be deposited on high aspect ratio
structures, which are typical of MEMS devices.6 In fact, a recent
report 7 has shown that the tribological characteristics of surfaces
can be significantly improved through the use of ALD coatings,
due to the highly uniform nature of the deposition. This is
quantified with respect to the debris creation and the stability
of the friction coefficient. In other areas, TiO 2 and other metal
oxides have been deposited on the surfaces of anodic aluminum
oxide membranes by using ALD, to modify the surface
uniformity, surface chemistry, and selectivity of the pores, and
the surface coatings have been shown to be stable up to as much
as 500° C in some cases. 8 -10 Related to this work, others have
found that porous TiO 2 materials can be optimal substrates for
biosensing applications. 11 While many other applications of
ALD exist, these initial discoveries clearly motivate the need
to develop fundamental models and simulation tools to help
guide this technique.
Although ALD is now gaining significant interest among a
broad research base, a fundamental understanding of this
technique at the atomic scale is relatively nonexistent, which
severely hampers its future development. We focus on the initial
surface reactions of TiO2 deposition onto a SiO 2 substrate using
TiCl 4 and H 2 O as precursors. While the growth characteristics
of these films are pertinent to a wide range of future applications
(such as high- gate dielectric replacement materials, thin film
photocatalysts, dielectric optical filters and waveguides, etc.),
a detailed mechanistic study of the surface processes is lacking.
In this work, we present DFT calculations of the initial
reaction mechanisms of ALD of TiO 2 onto SiO 2 surfaces using
hybrid density functional theory. At the onset, it is important
to recognize that we restrict our investigation to modeling only
the initial reaction mechanisms. The actual ALD growth
mechanism is complicated by competing reactions and signifi-
cant structural relaxation, as surface coverage increases and
subsequent layers are deposited.12 In fact, the densification
processes occurring during ALD thin film growth have been
studied by others with Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simula-
tions.13 The KMC approach is able to capture this behavior,
which is accompanied by increasing coordination number of
the metal atoms within the deposited film. In addition, the actual
growth process depends on the operating conditions and the
configurations and densities of surface reactive sites, often
leading to amorphous structures and point defects in the
deposited film. Due to the high computational cost of first-
principle calculations, it is not practical to model all of the
features of the ALD growth cycle. Therefore, we focus only on
8337J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 8337 -8347
10.1021/jp060367b CCC: $33.50 © 2006 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 04/04/2006
Downloaded via LEIBNIZ UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER on November 19, 2024 at 14:21:28 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


the initial surface reaction mechanisms that initialize the ALD
growth of TiO 2 on different reactive sites of SiO 2 surfaces in
the zero coverage limit. Our DFT calculations suggest that the
presence of various surface functionalities will have a significant
impact on the film deposition process, and this information
should be used to identify suitable experimental operating
conditions for achieving a desired film quality. The details of
our calculations are presented in the following section.
2. Computational Details
There are two types of reactive sites on the hydroxylated SiO 2
surface: surface -OH groups (Figure 1a -c) and siloxane
bridges (Figure 1d). To represent these reaction sites on the
surface, several cluster models are used in this work. First, we
used a small Si(OH)3 -OH* cluster (Figure 1a) to represent
isolated -OH groups on the surface, where surface species are
denoted by asterisks. Next, a larger cluster, (SiH 3 O) 3 Si -OH*,
shown in Figure 1b, is used to investigate cluster size effects.
Besides isolated-OH groups, the hydroxylated SiO 2 surface
also has adjacent -OH groups normally linked by a hydrogen
bond. To investigate surface reactions on the hydrogen-bonded
hydroxyl groups, we used the Si(OH)3 -O -Si(OH) 3 cluster
model shown in Figure 1c.
These models above have also been previously used by Han
and co-workers to investigate ZrO 2 ALD growth on a SiO 2
surface. 14 At high temperature, the neighboring -OH groups
can also react to give up free water molecules, leaving reactive
siloxane bridges, as shown in Figure 1d. The geometry of all
four cluster models is optimized without applying boundary
constraints. This may underestimate the actual mechanical
constraints imposed on the atoms of the cluster, due to binding
with the rest of the surface. However, we found that the bonding
interactions involved in the surface reactions are sufficiently
local and delocalization effects are not significant. As a result,
the fully relaxed clusters are sufficient to obtain the relative
energies of critical structures for the surface reactions. In
addition, we did not observe unrealistic structural reorganization
of the cluster models, when compared to their experimental
analogues.
Our predicted reaction mechanisms of TiO 2 ALD on the
hydroxylated SiO 2 surface are based on accurate first-principles
studies of reaction pathways of gaseous precursors interacting
with the SiO2 cluster models. All calculations were performed
with Gaussian03. 15 The minimum energy structures and transi-
tion structures along surface reaction pathways were computed
by using gradient-corrected density functional theory with the
Becke three-parameter exchange functional 16 and the Lee -
Yang -Parr correlation functional 17 (B3LYP). This method has
been successfully used to predict reaction mechanisms and
associated energetics for a number of reactions in ALD thin
film growth.1,14,18 -23 B3LYP has also been shown to be accurate
for studying transition metals. 24 To determine the effect of basis
set on energy prediction, we performed preliminary calculations
of the initial surface reactions between the SiO2 surface and
the precursors TiCl 4 and H 2 O using the small Si(OH) 3 -OH*
cluster. The reaction barriers were predicted by using three
model chemistries:
The model to the left of the double slash is the one at which
the energy was computed, and the model to the right of the
double slash is the one at which the molecular geometry was
optimized. While the details of these basis sets and nomenclature
can be found elsewhere,25 the progression from MC1 to MC3
represents a simultaneous increase in model accuracy and
computational demand. Our calculations indicated that, although
the reaction mechanisms for the two half-reactions do not change
with different model chemistries, the reaction energetics are
certainly affected. The predicted relative energies of the critical
structures along the reaction pathways for the two half-reactions
with the three model chemistries are given in Tables 1 and 2.
The predictions from the lowest cost MC1 model chemistry
differ significantly from the results from the highest level MC3
model chemistry. The small 6-31G(d,p) basis set26 for both
geometry optimization and energy calculation does not give an
accurate energy prediction for the adsorbed complex or the
transition state structures. The triple-œ basis sets, multiple
polarization functions, and diffuse functions can significantly
improve the description of bond energies, especially for the
adsorbed complex and the transition state structures. The MC2
and MC3 model chemistries give very similar results. The TiCl4
adsorption energy on the SiO 2 surface is calculated to be 3.8
Figure 1. Cluster models used to represent reactive sites on the SiO 2
surface: (a) Si(OH) 3 -OH cluster used to represent isolated surface
-OH groups, (b) (SiH 3 O) 3 Si -OH cluster used to represent isolated
surface -OH groups, (c) Si(OH) 3 -O -Si(OH) 3 cluster used to represent
adjacent hydrogen-bonded -OH groups, and (d) cluster used to
represent siloxane bridge sites on the SiO 2 surface.
TABLE 1: Predicted Relative Energies of the Critical
Structures for the Si(OH) 3 -OH* + TiCl 4 f
Si(OH) 3 -O -TiCl 3 * + HCl Half-Reaction Calculated at
Three Different Model Chemistries
relative energy (kcal/mol)
MC1 MC2 MC3
Si(OH) 3 -OH* + TiCl 4 000
reactant complex -8.9 -3.8 -3.2
TS 5.9 10.9 11.2
Si(OH)3 -O -TiCl 4 * + HCl -7.9 -4.6 -4.0
TABLE 2: Predicted Relative Energies of the Critical
Structures for the Si(OH) 3 -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O f
Si(OH) 3 -O -Ti(OH)Cl 2 * + HCl Half-Reaction Calculated at
Three Different Model Chemistries
relative energy (kcal/mol)
MC1 MC2 MC3
Si(OH) 3 -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O0 0 0
reactant complex -11.0 -3.4 -3.8
TS 2.1 13.8 12.7
product complex 7.8 -0.3 -0.5
Si(OH) 3 -O -Ti(OH)Cl 2 * + HCl -5.3 3.2 2.6
MC1: B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)//B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)
MC2: B3LYP/6-311 ++G(2df,2p)//B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)
MC3:
B3LYP/6-311 ++G(2df,2p)//B3LYP/6-311 ++G
(2df,2p)
8338 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 Hu and Turner


and 3.2 kcal/mol, using the MC2 and MC3 model chemistries,
respectively. The calculated reaction barrier between TiCl 4 and
the SiO 2 surface with these two model chemistries is also very
similar, with a difference of 0.3 kcal/mol. The largest difference
between the results obtained from the two model chemistries is
observed in the reaction barrier of the second half-reaction
between H2 O and Si(OH) 3 -O -TiCl 3 *, which is only 0.7 kcal/
mol. The MC2 model chemistry, which performs the energy
calculation with the large 6-311++G(2df,2p) basis set 27,28 at
the geometry optimized with the small 6-31G(d,p) basis set,
yields very similar results to those with the higher cost MC3
model chemistry. Therefore, the B3LYP/6-311++G(2df,2p)//
B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) model chemistry was used in all of our
subsequent calculations due to an optimal tradeoff between
computational accuracy and resource cost.
Corrections for basis set superposition error (BSSE) were
estimated by the counterpoise method 29 in preliminary tests. Our
calculations on the small model (Figure 1a) suggest that in
computing the binding energy of the reactant and product
complexes, the use of MC1 model chemistry leads to a large
BSSE. This is primarily due to the negatively charged O atoms,
which borrow the basis functions available on the Ti atom. This
leads to a more flexible description of the wave function and
ultimately a lower energy of the adsorbed complexes, which
can be incorrectly ascribed to an increase in the binding energy.
Although the difference between the uncorrected and the BSSE
corrected binding energies is rather large in the case of small
basis sets, it becomes much smaller by using larger basis sets:
0.8-1.3 and 1.2 -1.5 kcal/mol at MC2 and MC3 model
chemistries, respectively. At the B3LYP level, the triple- œ basis
sets, multiple polarization functions, and diffuse functions reduce
the BSSE to a negligible level. Therefore, in the following
consideration, we use the MC2 model chemistry without BSSE
corrections.
Gaussian03’s reaction path following facility was used to
explore the reaction potential energy surfaces (PES). Geometries
were optimized by minimizing the energy to stationary points
on the PES. The nature of the calculated structures was verified
by subsequent frequency calculations, which also yielded zero-
point energy (ZPE) corrections. Intrinsic reaction coordinate
(IRC) calculations were performed to examine the reaction path
leading down from a transition structure in both directions on
the PES to ensure that the transition states connect reactants to
products. The normal modes corresponding to the imaginary
frequencies of the transition state structures were examined with
molecular visualization to verify that the nuclear motion tends
to deform the transition state structure along the pertinent
reaction coordinate.
3. Results and Discussion
ALD growth of TiO 2 from TiCl 4 and H 2 O involves alternating
exposure of the two precursors. Thus, the growth of TiO 2
involves two half-reactions:
The actual reactions taking place during each exposure depend
on a number of factors, such as temperature, surface coverage,
and the presence of reactive sites on the surface, which we
examine in some detail here. Different types of reactive
functional groups exist on the SiO2 surface and they may have
different reaction mechanisms with the gaseous precursors. In
the following sections, we present DFT calculations of the initial
reaction mechanisms between different surface active groups
and the precursors, TiCl4 and H 2 O.
3.1. Isolated Hydroxyl Groups. 3.1.1. First Half-Reaction.
The reaction of TiCl 4 with surface -OH groups is initiated by
the adsorption of TiCl 4 onto the surface. A relaxed PES scan
(which samples points on the potential surface and performs a
geometry optimization of the remaining nonscanned coordinates)
indicates that there is not a barrier for the adsorption of TiCl4
onto the surface -OH groups. TiCl 4 spontaneously adsorbs onto
the isolated -OH surface sites through Lewis acid/base interac-
tions between Ti and O to form a reactant complex with a Ti -O
bond distance of 2.28 Å. A natural bond orbital (NBO)
calculation was carried out to examine the interaction between
TiCl4 and the surface -OH groups. The second-order perturba-
tion theory analysis shows that the interactions between the
oxygen lone pair NBO and the Ti-Cl antibond NBOs give
strong stabilization. These interactions lead to donation of
occupancy from the oxygen lone pair NBO into the empty Ti -
Cl antibond hybrid orbitals.
A natural population analysis yields consistent results. The
total population on all of the natural atomic orbitals (NAO) of
TiCl4 increased by 0.11 in the adsorbed state compared to that
in the gas phase. The occupancy donated by the oxygen of the
surface hydroxyl group is delocalized in the NAOs of TiCl 4 .
This interaction leads to an approximate 5-coordination Ti and
changes the coordination geometry from tetrahedron close to
trigonal bipyramid. The adsorption step is weakly exothermic
with an adsorption energy of-3.2 kcal/mol.
Following the formation of the adsorbed complex, Ti in the
TiCl 4 can attack the O in the surface -OH to release HCl
through a transition state, as shown in Figure 2c. As Ti
approaches O, electronic charge is transferred from O (donor)
to Ti (acceptor) with the formation of a Ti-O bond. The
accumulation of negative charge on Ti can induce the rehy-
bridization of the Ti group from 5-coordination to 4-coordina-
tion, which leads to the breakage of one Ti-Cl bond, releasing
a negatively charged Cl. Meanwhile, the rehybridization of the
Ti group stabilizes a buildup of negative charge on the O and
weakens the O-H bond. When the negatively charged Cl that
is released “sees” the positively charged H in the transition state
structure, it promptly attacks the weakened O-H bond, leading
to the breakage of the O -H bond and the formation of the H -Cl
bond. The reaction mechanism above is illustrated in Figure 2.
The energy profile for this first half-reaction on the isolated
hydroxyl group is shown in Figure 3. As indicated in the figure,
this reaction is exothermic by 6.5 kcal/mol, with an activation
barrier of 11.9 kcal/mol. The HCl product molecules that are
formed may adsorb on the surface, but they can be easily
desorbed due to their weak binding energy (0.4 kcal/mol).
3.1.2. Second Half-Reaction. During the exposure of water,
water molecules react with the surface intermediates deposited
during the first half-cycle to release additional HCl species. The
water molecules first approach the surface to form weakly
adsorbed complexes through a Lewis acid/base interaction
between Ti and O. The adsorption of water can occur in different
modes, such as attached to the top or side sites of Ti
intermediates. The three water adsorption states (RC1, RC2,
and RC3) that have been identified are shown in Figure 4, and
these correspond to local minima on the potential energy surface.
Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Deposition onto a SiO 2 Substrate J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 8339


The binding energies for adsorption are predicted to be -3.7
(RC1), -2.8 (RC2), and -2.0 (RC3) kcal/mol. The weakly
adsorbed water molecules can diffuse on the surface and change
from one adsorption state to another. The activation energy of
the diffusion is 0.6 kcal/mol from RC3 to RC2 and 2.7
kcal/mol from RC2 to RC1. These two steps are exothermic by
0.8 and 0.9 kcal/mol, respectively. The energy barrier of the
reverse diffusion is not much higher, 1.4 kcal/mol from RC2
to RC3 and 3.6 kcal/mol from RC1 to RC2. The small “hop”
barriers and the nearly equivalent potential energies of the three
adsorbed states make the diffusion among all of the different
adsorption states possible. Thus, there is not a significant
preference among the different adsorption modes, suggesting
an equilibrium distribution of adsorbed states.
Following the adsorption, H 2 O reacts with the Ti intermediate,
forming a surface -OH group and releasing an HCl molecule.
The energy profile of the surface diffusion and reaction of H 2 O
on the Ti surface intermediate is shown in Figure 5. Starting
from different adsorption states (RC1, RC2, or RC3), the
minimum energy reaction pathway leading to the release of HCl
is different, while the mechanisms of the different pathways
are similar. As the adsorbed H2 O attacks the Ti, the negative
Figure 2. Atomic mechanism of the reaction between TiCl 4 and the isolated surface -OH group: (a) reactant complex, (b) formation of the Ti -O
bond and the 5-coordinated Ti, (c) transition state structure, (d) formation of the H -Cl bond, and (e) product complex.
Figure 3. ZPE-corrected potential energy surface for the (SiH 3 O) 3 -
Si -OH* + H 2 O reaction, calculated by using the MC2 model
chemistry.
Figure 4. Adsorbed complex structures optimized at the B3LYP/6-
31G(d,p) level of theory. RC1, RC2, and RC3 are the three different
adsorption modes of H2 O on the SiO 2 -O -Ti(OH) 3 * surface site.
Figure 5. ZPE-corrected PES for the surface diffusion of H 2 O and
the (SiH 3 O) 3 Si -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O reaction. RC1, RC2, and RC3 are
the three different reactant complexes formed by the different adsorption
modes of H2 O. TS1, TS2, and TS3 are the transition states of the surface
reaction. TS4 and TS5 are the transition states for surface diffusion.
PC1 and PC2 are product complexes. PSS1 and PSS2 are the two
product surface sites obtained through the different reaction pathways.
8340 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 Hu and Turner


charge of Ti increases with decreasing Ti -O bond distance.
Depending on the orientation of the H 2 O relative to the Ti group,
the rehybridization of Ti (induced by the accumulation of
negative charge) leads to the breakage of one of the Ti -Cl
bonds, which occurs early along the reaction coordinate.
Meanwhile, as the O in H2 O bonds with Ti, the O -H bond
closer to the released Cl is weakened with the transfer of
negative charge from H to O. The now negatively charged Cl
is capable of attacking the positively charged H to break the
H-O bond and form HCl. The energies of the transition states
TS1, TS2, and TS3 are predicted to be 16.8, 15.8, and 18.9
kcal/mol relative to their corresponding adsorbed complexes,
as shown in Figure 5. The two reaction pathways going through
the transition state structures TS1 and TS2 give rise to the same
product complex, leaving the same surface site (PSS1) after the
desorption of HCl. In contrast, the reaction pathway passing
through the transition state structure TS3 results in a different
surface site (PSS2). This structure (PSS2) is slightly distorted
by the attraction between the H atom from the surface-OH
group and the O atom from the SiO 2 substrate. The relaxation
of the structure from PSS2 to PSS1 is exothermic by 1.7 kcal/
mol. As a result of the lower potential energy, the PSS1 surface
sites are predicted to be more prevalent than the PSS2 sites. In
addition, there are two reaction pathways (with smaller barriers)
leading to PSS1 surface sites, while there is only one reaction
pathway leading to PSS2 surface sites.
Water molecules can undergo further reactions with the
surface intermediates to release additional HCl molecules, until
all of the Cl atoms on the surface are replaced by hydroxyl
groups. Similar to the atomic mechanism that produced the first
hydroxyl group, the subsequent hydroxylation reactions are
initiated with the adsorption of H2 O on the surface Ti intermedi-
ates. Water molecules can be attached to the top or to the side
sites of the Ti intermediates to form an adsorbed complex.
Following the adsorption, one H atom from the adsorbed H2 O
bonds with the nearest surface Cl atom to form HCl. Although
the different adsorption modes of H2 O on Ti can initiate different
reaction pathways, atomic mechanisms and associated energies
along these reaction pathways are very similar. Therefore, we
only consider the reaction pathway starting from the adsorption
of H2 O to the apical sites of the Ti groups.
The ZPE-corrected PESs for the three hydroxylation reactions
on Ti intermediates are shown in Figure 6. The three hydrox-
ylation reactions leading to the removal of the first, second,
and third Cl atoms have almost identical activation barriers
(16.8, 16.5, and 16.5 kcal/mol) and are increasingly endothermic
(3.5, 5.7, and 7.0 kcal/mol). The overall reaction enthalpy for
the removal of all three Cl atoms is 16.2 kcal/mol. Although
these reactions are thermodynamically unfavorable, they are still
suitable for ALD because of the continuous purge of the gaseous
product (HCl). However, the lack of a thermodynamic driving
force suggests that the hydroxylation reactions may not be
complete (leaving Cl impurities) unless the HCl products are
continuously removed from the reactor. Because the product
complex is higher in energy than the reactant complex, the
reverse exchange reaction features a lower activation barrier
than that of the forward hydroxylation reaction. If the adsorbed
HCl molecules do not desorb in time or the desorbed HCl
molecules readsorb on the surface, the faster reverse reaction
can lead to Cl impurities in the film.
3.1.3. Cluster Size Effect. Two different cluster models, shown
in Figure 1a,b, were used to represent isolated -OH groups on
the surface, to examine the effect of cluster size on the geometry
and energy predictions along the reaction coordinate. The
predicted energies of the stationary points on the PESs for the
two half-reactions (taking place on an isolated -OH group) are
shown in Tables 3 and 4. Although the calculations using the
two clusters predict the same reaction mechanism, deviations
in energy along the reaction coordinates are observed. For
example, the calculated activation barrier of the Si(OH)3 -OH*
+ TiCl 4 reaction is 2.8 kcal/mol higher with the small cluster
model than with the large cluster model. A closer examination
shows that the difference in energy is an artifact from the
boundary conditions of the small cluster. Specifically, the
interaction between the terminal H atoms and the negatively
charged atom in the precursor molecule can distort the geometry
and lead to an unrealistic PES. For the Si(OH)3 -OH* + TiCl 4
reaction, the energy of the adsorbed complex (Figure 7a) is
underestimated by using the small cluster due to the interaction
between the artificial H-termination and the Cl in TiCl4 .I n
addition, the transition state structure (Figure 7b) is deformed
by artificial interactions between H and Cl. The predicted Ti-
Figure 6. ZPE-corrected PES for the three continuous hydroxylation
reactions on the isolated -OH group. RC: reactant complex; TS:
transition state; PC: product complex.
TABLE 3: Predicted Relative Energies of the Critical
Structures for the SiO 2 -OH* + TiCl 4 f SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * +
HCl Half-Reaction Calculated with Two Different Cluster
Sizes
relative energy (kcal/mol)
Si(OH) 3 -OH*
cluster
(SiH 3 O) 3 Si -OH*
cluster
SiO 2 -OH* + TiCl 4 00
reactant complex -3.8 -3.2
TS 10.9 8.7
product complex -7.1 -6.9
SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * + HCl -4.6 -6.5
TABLE 4: Predicted Relative Energies of the Critical
Structures for the SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O f
SiO 2 -O -Ti(OH)Cl 2 * + HCl Half-Reaction Calculated with
Two Different Cluster Sizes
relative energy (kcal/mol)
Si(OH) 3 -OH*
cluster
(SiH 3 O) 3 Si -OH*
cluster
SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O0 0
reactant complex -3.4 -3.7
TS 13.8 13.1
product complex -0.3 1.4
SiO 2 -O -Ti(OH)Cl 2 * + HCl 3.2 3.5
Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Deposition onto a SiO 2 Substrate J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 8341


O -Si bond angle decreases from 146 ° (large cluster) to 141 °
(small cluster). This deformation tension leads to an overestima-
tion of the energy of the transition state structure with use of
the small cluster.
The deviations in energy due to the boundary effects are also
observed for the SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * + H 2 O reaction. As illustrated
in Figure 7c, the artificial interaction of H and Cl leads to the
underestimation of the energy of the product complex. As a
result, the desorption energy of HCl calculated with use of the
small cluster is 1.4 kcal/mol higher than that with the large
cluster. Therefore, in our calculations, the large (SiH3 O) 3 Si -
OH* cluster is used to represent isolated surface -OH groups,
to avoid unrealistic boundary effects.
3.2. Adjacent Hydrogen-Bonded Hydroxyl Groups. 3.2.1.
First Half-Reaction. Adjacent hydroxyl groups on the SiO 2
surface can interact through their hydrogen bonds, and reactions
taking place on these groups are different from those on isolated
hydroxyl groups. TiCl4 can adsorb on the adjacent hydroxyl
groups in two modes. The two adsorption states that have been
identified are shown in Figure 8a,c. Similar to the reactions on
the isolated-OH group, TiCl 4 can adsorb on one of the -OH
groups through a Lewis acid/base interaction between Ti and
O. The adsorption step is weakly exothermic with an adsorption
energy of-3.4 kcal/mol, which is very close to that on the
isolated -OH group. In addition, TiCl 4 can “sit” on the bridge
site of the two adjacent -OH groups. A NBO analysis shows
that there are strong interactions between the oxygen lone pair
NBOs of the two O atoms from the adjacent surface -OH
groups and the Ti -Cl antibond NBOs of the adsorbed TiCl 4 .
These interactions lead to donations of occupancy from these
oxygen lone pair NBOs into the empty Ti-Cl antibond hybrid
orbitals.
A natural population analysis leads to the same conclusion.
The total population on all of the NAO of TiCl 4 increased by
0.26 in the adsorbed state compared to that in the gas phase.
The increase in the NAO population is approximately double
that of the TiCl4 adsorbed on an isolated -OH group (0.11).
This increase is due to the donation of occupancy from the two
oxygen atoms of the adjacent surface-OH groups, which is
delocalized in the NAOs of TiCl 4 . As a result, the adsorption
energy of TiCl 4 is 6.5 kcal/mol on adjacent -OH surface sites,
which is approximately double that on isolated -OH surface
sites (3.2 kcal/mol). In addition, the two oxygen lone pairs
interact with the adsorbed TiCl4 , leading to approximately
6-coordinated Ti and changing the coordination geometry from
tetrahedron close to octahedron. DFT calculation results suggest
that the bridge-site mode is more stable than the adsorption on
a single hydroxyl group. Although the adsorption on the bridge
site involves the breakage of the hydrogen bond (which presents
an energy barrier), the “hop” barrier for TiCl4 from the single
hydroxyl group to the bridge site is very small (1.6 kcal/mol).
Therefore, these “hops” are favored thermodynamically, with
minimal kinetic limitations, and the bridge-site mode is predicted
to be the favored adsorption state.
The reaction mechanism is illustrated in Figure 8. As shown,
TiCl 4 first adsorbs onto one of the -OH surface sites, and then
it easily “hops” to the bridge site to form a more stable
adsorption complex. Following the formation of the adsorbed
complex, TiCl4 can attack one of the surface -OH groups to
release HCl. This process may occur through two potential
reaction pathways. As shown in Figure 8c, the H in the hydroxyl
group can associate with one of the two closest Cl atoms (Cl1
and Cl2) to form HCl. In each of the two pathways, during the
approach of TiCl4 , the directions of both the TiCl 4 molecule
and the -OH groups are adjusted to reduce the distance of H
and the targeted Cl. With the decrease of the H -Cl distance,
the attraction between H and the targeted Cl increases the
distance of Ti and the targeted Cl, weakening the Ti-Cl bond.
Meanwhile, as Ti approaches O, electronic charge is trans-
ferred from O to Ti with the formation of the Ti -O bond. The
rehybridization of the Ti group, due to its accumulation of
negative charge, causes the weakened Ti-Cl bond to break,
releasing the negatively charged Cl. During this process, with
the electronic charge transfer from O to Ti, the O becomes more
electron attractive. This tendency, together with the H-Cl
attraction, induces the electronic charge transfer from H to O,
weakening the O-H bond. Next, the released negatively charged
Cl promptly attacks the positively charged H to form H -Cl,
and the system is stabilized through the subsequent relaxation
of the structure.
The energy profile for the reaction above is shown in Figure
9. As illustrated in the figure, both reaction pathways lead to
the same product with a reaction enthalpy of-3.5 kcal/mol.
However, the activation barrier of the reaction via the TS1
transition state structure (14.3 kcal/mol) is much lower than that
via the TS2 transition state structure (23.8 kcal/mol). The large
difference that we calculate is not surprising. In the adsorption
complex, Figure 8c, the H-Cl2 distance is longer than the
H -Cl1 distance. Therefore, it requires more energy to distort
this structure to reach the transition state, where Cl2 can “see”
the H. Even at elevated temperatures, such a difference in
activation energies (9.5 kcal/mol) corresponds to a large
difference in reaction rates. Hence, the reaction via the TS1
transition state structure with the lower activation barrier is
considered to be the dominant reaction path.
After liberating one HCl, the remaining Ti intermediate on
the surface can further react with the adjacent surface hydroxyl
groups. The reaction mechanism (Figure 8) is similar to the
first exchange reaction. The H in the hydroxyl group can bond
to the nearest Cl to liberate an HCl molecule, leaving a Ti
intermediate bonded to the two surface O atoms. As illustrated
in the energy profile (Figure 9), the activation barrier of the
reaction with the second hydroxyl group is 14.8 kcal/mol, which
is very close to that of the exchange reaction with the first
hydroxyl (14.3 kcal/mol). However, the first exchange reaction
has a reaction enthalpy of-3.5 kcal/mol, while the reaction
with the second hydroxyl group is endothermic by 3.9 kcal/
mol. The overall reaction enthalpy of the reaction between the
TiCl4 and the two adjacent hydroxyl groups is 0.4 kcal/mol.
As a result of the nonequilibrium nature of ALD, kinetics
plays a key role in determining the structure and homogeneity
of the deposited film. According to the results of our DFT
calculations, the first-half reactions on isolated and adjacent
hydroxyl groups feature similar reaction barriers indicating
similar intrinsic kinetics.
3.2.2. Second Half-Reaction. When the second precursor
(H 2 O) is introduced onto the surface, the surface intermediates
deposited during the first half-cycle (Figure 8k) can be fully
Figure 7. Distorted geometries predicted by using the Si(OH) 3 -OH*
cluster.
8342 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 Hu and Turner


hydroxylated with the removal of the surface Cl atoms. The
reaction mechanism, with the associated energetics, is shown
in Figure 10. Similar to the H2 O + SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * reaction
described above, H 2 O molecules first adsorb onto the surface
Ti intermediate. Following the formation of the adsorbed
complex, the adsorbed H2 O is capable of attacking the Ti group
to release an HCl molecule, leaving a surface hydroxyl group
bonded to Ti. The atomic mechanism is similar to that of the
H2 O + SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * reaction described above. After the
first hydroxylation reaction, the remaining surface Cl can react
with another H2 O molecule to form a second surface hydroxyl
group. Comparison of these two hydroxylation reactions indi-
cates very similar H 2 O adsorption energies (2.2 and 2.3 kcal/
mol). However, the activation barrier to remove the second Cl
atom (12.3 kcal/mol) is lower than that of the first hydroxylation
reaction (15.1 kcal/mol). Similar to the H2 O + SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 *
Figure 8. Atomic mechanism of the reaction between TiCl 4 and adjacent hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl groups on the SiO 2 surface: (a) adsorption
on a single hydroxyl group, (b) transition state structure for TiCl 4 diffusion between the two adsorption states, (c) adsorption on the bridge site, (d)
transition state structure, (e) transition state structure, (f) product complex, (g) product complex, (h) surface intermediate after the desorpti on of
HCl, (i) transition state structure, (j) product complex, and (k) surface intermediate after the desorption of HCl.
Figure 9. ZPE-corrected PES for the first half-reactions taking place
on the adjacent hydrogen-bonded -OH groups. The letters correspond
to the structures shown in Figure 8.
Figure 10. ZPE-corrected PES for the two continuous hydroxylation
reactions during the second half-reactions on the adjacent -OH groups.
Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Deposition onto a SiO 2 Substrate J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 8343


reaction, these two hydroxylation reactions are endothermic. The
overall reaction enthalpy of the two continuous hydroxylation
reactions is 10.7 kcal/mol. Considering the endothermic nature
of this step, the second half-reaction favors the removal of the
HCl product and enough exposure time will drive the hydrox-
ylation reactions to completion, reducing Cl impurities.
3.3. Oxygen Bridges. In addition to reactions with the surface
hydroxyl groups, the TiCl 4 precursor molecules can also react
with oxygen bridges on the surface. The reaction mechanism
is illustrated in Figure 11. Similar to the first half-reactions on
the surface hydroxyl groups, TiCl4 first spontaneously adsorbs
on the surface oxygen bridges through a Lewis acid/base
interaction between Ti and O. This step is weakly exothermic
with an adsorption energy of-4.7 kcal/mol. The adsorbed TiCl 4
is then capable of attacking the reactive oxygen bridges. As Ti
approaches O, negative charge is transferred from O to Ti with
the creation of a Ti-O bond. The accumulation of negative
charge on Ti can induce the rehybridization of the Ti group
from 5-coordination to 4-coordination, which causes a Ti -Cl
bond to break, releasing a negatively charged Cl. Meanwhile,
with the electronic charge transfer from O to Ti, the O becomes
more electron attractive. This tendency, together with the Si-
Cl attraction, induces the electronic charge transfer from Si to
O, weakening Si-O bond (closest to the negatively charged
Cl). The negatively charged Cl is then capable of attacking the
positively charged Si to break the Si-O bond and form a Si -
Cl bond. When the system passes through the transition state
structure along the reaction coordinate, the structure promptly
relaxes by swinging out the Ti group and relaxing the Si-O -
Si angle. The energy profile for the reaction above is shown in
Figure 12. As noted in the figure, the reaction is exothermic by
27.9 kcal/mol with the activation barrier of 12.8 kcal/mol. As
compared to the exchange reaction of TiCl4 on surface hydroxyl
groups, the reaction between TiCl 4 and surface oxygen bridges
has a similar activation barrier (12.8 kcal/mol on oxygen bridges
versus 11.9 kcal/mol on isolated hydroxyl groups and 14.3 kcal/
mol on adjacent hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl groups), but the
reaction is much more exothermic.
On the basis of the nearly equivalent activation barriers, we
predict that the reactivity of the oxygen bridges will be very
similar to that of the hydroxyl groups. However, this conclusion
is contrary to the measurements of Kinney and Staley, 30 who
observe that the siloxane bridges react with TiCl 4 more quickly
than the hydroxyl groups. We believe that this discrepancy is
the result of the experimental conditions used. In the experi-
ments, TiCl4 was filled into a sealed chamber containing the
silica sample, and their conclusion was drawn from the FTIR
spectrum collected after the reactions reachedequilibrium .A s
the reaction enthalpy ( ¢H 0 ) for the reaction of TiCl 4 on the
surface oxygen bridges ( -27.9 kcal/mol) is much more negative
than the ¢H 0 for the exchange reaction on the hydroxyl groups
( -6.5 kcal/mol on isolated hydroxyl groups and -3.5 kcal/mol
on adjacent hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl groups), the equilibrium
constant of the reaction on the oxygen bridges is predicted to
be significantly larger than that on the hydroxyl groups. This
large difference in equilibrium constants indicates that the extent
of reaction on the oxygen bridges is higher than that on the
surface hydroxyl groups. Therefore, it is not surprising to
observe a larger fraction of oxygen bridges reacted with TiCl4
than surface hydroxyl groups at equilibrium . However, the
Figure 11. Atomic mechanism of the reaction between TiCl 4 and oxygen bridge sites: (a) reactant complex, (b) formation of the Ti -O bond and
a 5-coordinated Ti, (c) breaking of the Ti -Cl bond, (d) transition state structure, (e) relaxation of the structure, and (f) product complex.
Figure 12. ZPE-corrected PES for the reaction between TiCl 4 and the
oxygen bridges sites. The labels “a” and “d” correspond to the structures
shown in Figure 11.
8344 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 Hu and Turner


equilibrium thermodynamics does not yield information perti-
nent to the individual reaction rates. Considering the nonequi-
librium nature of ALD, where reverse reactions are often
negligible, we believe that an in situ analysis will show a
simultaneous and proportional decrease in the number of oxygen
bridges and hydroxyl groups during exposure to TiCl4 .
3.4. Surface Chlorine. The reaction between TiCl 4 and
surface oxygen bridges leaves two adjacent, dissimilar surface
groups: SiO2 -O -TiCl 3 * and SiO 2 -Cl* (Figure 11f). The
SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * group is similar to the surface intermediate
formed by the reaction between TiCl 4 and the isolated surface
hydroxyl group, and the reaction between H 2 O and this type of
surface group has been described above. So, although both of
the surface groups can react during the H2 O exposure, here we
only examine the reaction between H 2 O and SiO 2 -Cl*.
When introduced into the reactor, H 2 O first spontaneously
absorbs onto the SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * surface site through a Lewis
acid/base interaction between Ti and O. Similar to our previous
calculations, there are three different adsorption modes (RC1,
RC2, and RC3). Although the exchange reaction between H2 O
and SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * can begin from any of these three
adsorption states, we only found a single H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl*
reaction pathway, initiated from the RC3 adsorption state.
However, possible reaction pathways starting from the other
adsorption states may be found by using larger cluster modes,
which takes into account different combinations of neighboring
groups. This possibility will be investigated in future studies.
The atomic mechanism of the H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl* reaction is
shown in Figure 13. As illustrated in the figure, H 2 O first
spontaneously absorbs onto the SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * surface site
through the RC3 adsorption mode. Following the formation of
the adsorption complex, the adsorbed H2 O is capable of
attacking the Ti group to release a HCl and leave a surface
hydroxyl group bonded to Ti. As an alternative to the H 2 O +
SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * pathway, the adsorbed H 2 O may attack the
adjacent SiO 2 -Cl* group. The lone pair on the aqueous oxygen
is capable of attacking the surface Si in a nucleophilic fashion.
As the H2 O approaches the SiO 2 -Cl* group, it adjusts its
direction so that the aqueous oxygen can directly attack the
silicon and form a Si-O bond through the TS1 transition state,
a process that is accompanied by the extrusion of the surface
Cl. As noted in the energy profile (Figure 14), the activation
barrier of this step is 17.8 kcal/mol.
Due to the poor electrophilicity of the SiO 2 -Cl* group, the
reaction intermediate (Figure 13c) is 17.1 kcal/mol higher in
energy than adsorbed reactant complex (Figure 13a). With the
formation of the Si-O bond, the rehybridization of Si (induced
by the negative charge transfer from O to Si) leads to the
breakage of the Si -Cl bond. Meanwhile, the rehybridization
of Si stabilizes the transfer of negative charge in the H 2 O
molecule from one H to O. The now negatively charged Cl is
capable of attacking the positively charged H to break the H -O
bond and form HCl, and this step occurs easily with a very
small barrier (0.3 kcal/mol). Different from the endothermic H 2 O
+ SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * reaction, the overall H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl*
reaction is exothermic by 5.7 kcal/mol.
As mentioned above, after the adsorption on the SiO 2 -O -
TiCl 3 * surface site, H 2 O can react with either SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 *
or the adjacent SiO 2 -Cl* group. In the competing reactions
the reactant is consumed by two different reactions to form
different products:
where a , c , and e represent the structures denoted by the same
letters in Figure 13, f represents the adsorbed product complex
of the H 2 O + SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * reaction, and P f , P r , P f *, and P 2
denote the probabilities of the corresponding reactions. As the
HCl product is assumed to be removed, the reverse reactions
(frome to c and from f to a ) are neglected. In the consecutive
H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl* reaction (reaction 3), the reactant forms an
intermediate product c , which either reacts further to form the
Figure 13. Atomic mechanism of the H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl* reaction: (a) adsorbed reactant complex, (b) first transition state structure, (c) reaction
intermediate, (d) second transition state structure, and (e) adsorbed product complex.
Figure 14. ZPE-corrected PES for the H 2 O + SiO 2 -Cl* reaction. The
letters correspond to the structures shown in Figure 13.
Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Deposition onto a SiO 2 Substrate J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 8345


final product e or back to reactant a . The probability of the
specific reaction event i ( P i) is proportional to exp( -¢G i/RT ),
where ¢G i is the free energy of activation of reaction i.
Assuming that the difference in entropy between the transition
state and the reactant complex (¢S i) is negligible and that ¢H i
only changes slightly as a function of temperature (at moderate
temperatures), P i is approximately proportional to exp( -¢H i0 /
RT ), where ¢H i0 is the enthalpy of activation at 0 K. As
illustrated in Figure 14, ¢H i0 of the reactions from c to e and
from c to a is 0.3 and 0.7 kcal/mol, respectively. At a
temperature of 500 K, we can estimate the branching ratio of
these two reactions:
reaction 3 proceeds through the formation of a relatively
unstable, short-lived intermediate c , whose transformation rate
is orders of magnitude faster than the rates of other reactions
taking place on the reactive site. Therefore, we can assume that
the short-lived intermediatec is in the steady state. From this
assumption, we obtain:
The overall probability of reaction 3 resulting from this
assumption is then obtained by combing eqs 5 and 6:
According to the calculations for the reaction of H 2 Oo nt h e
isolated SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * group, the activation barrier of reaction
4 starting from the RC3 adsorption state is 18.9 kcal/mol.
Additionally, as shown in Figure 14, the activation barrier of
the reaction froma to c is 17.8 kcal/mol. Therefore, we can
estimate the relative probability of reactions 3 and 4:
This result indicates that, after the adsorption on the SiO 2 -O -
TiCl 3 * surface site in the RC3 adsorption mode, H 2 O reacts
with the adjacent SiO 2 -Cl* group more likely than with the
SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * group. However, it cannot be concluded that
the H 2 O prefers the SiO 2 -Cl* group, since there are two
alternate pathways involving H 2 O + SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 *, with
relatively small barriers (starting from the RC1 and RC2
adsorption states of H2 O).
4. Conclusions
The initial reaction mechanisms for TiO 2 ALD onto SiO 2
surfaces, using TiCl 4 and H 2 O as precursors, have been
investigated with DFT calculations. The detailed atomic growth
mechanisms on different types of reactive groups of the SiO 2
surface (isolated -OH groups, adjacent hydrogen-bonded -OH
groups, and surface oxygen bridges) are different. During each
exposure, the gaseous precursor (TiCl4 or H 2 O) can react with
different types of reactive groups through different reaction
pathways, leaving various products on the surface.
When dosed into the reactor, the TiCl 4 can react with isolated
hydroxyl groups to leave a SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * species, with an
activation barrier of 11.9 kcal/mol. Meanwhile, TiCl 4 can also
react with adjacent hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl groups to leave
a TiCl2 * surface group. The dominant reaction mechanisms for
these steps have been identified, and the activation barriers of
the two consecutive reactions (releasing two HCl molecules)
are 14.3 and 14.8 kcal/mol. In addition, with a barrier of 12.8
kcal/mol, TiCl4 can react with surface oxygen bridge to leave
two adjacent surface groups (SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * and SiO 2 -Cl*).
Our calculations indicate that all of the investigated surface
functionalities are reactive toward the TiCl4 precursors.
During the second-half cycle, which introduces H 2 O into the
reactor, all of these intermediate surface groups can then react
with H2 O. Multiple adsorption modes of H 2 O on the SiO 2 -
O -TiCl 3 * surface group have been found, and the predicted
adsorption energies of the different adsorption modes are all
very similar. The “hop” barriers of adsorbed H2 O among the
different adsorption states are very small, indicating rapid
equilibration among these modes, and these adsorption modes
can initiate different reaction pathways. The SiO2 -O -TiCl 3 *
surface group can react with three consecutive H 2 O molecules
to release three HCl molecules, leaving SiO 2 -O -Ti(OH) 3 *o n
the surface. The activation barriers of these three consecutive
hydroxylation reactions are similar (16.8, 16.5, and 16.5 kcal/
mol). Similarly, H2 O can continuously react with the surface
TiCl 2 * group to release two HCl molecules and form a surface
Ti(OH) 2 * group. The activation barriers of these two consecutive
exchange reactions are 15.1 and 12.3 kcal/mol. In addition, an
atomic mechanism of the H2 O and SiO 2 -Cl* reaction has been
investigated. This reaction starts with the adsorption of H 2 O
on the adjacent SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * surface site in the RC3
adsorption mode. After the adsorption, the adsorbed H 2 Oi s
predicted to prefer the reaction with the adjacent SiO 2 -Cl*
group over that with the SiO 2 -O -TiCl 3 * group. The H 2 O +
SiO 2 -Cl* reaction is a consecutive reaction with the formation
of an unstable product intermediate, and the primary activation
barrier of this reaction is 17.8 kcal/mol.
Our DFT calculations show the complexity of the growth
mechanisms during TiO 2 ALD. The concentration and arrange-
ment of the different surface reactive groups determine the
resulting film growth characteristics. Therefore, the factors
which are related to the presence of the different surface reactive
groups, such as configuration of initial SiO2 substrate and growth
temperature, are predicted to have a marked influence on film
structure and growth rate. If reproducibility is expected,
experimental investigations should begin with thoroughly
characterized substrates, and the resulting film deposition must
be interpreted with respect to both the equilibrium and the
kinetic characteristics of the surface reactions. It is important
that our DFT results be interpreted within the context of our
cluster models. Other factors, not accounted for here, may
influence the predicted reaction mechanisms, such as varying
surface coverage and adsorbate-adsorbate interactions. In future
work, we plan to incorporate our DFT results into larger
simulation models, such as with kinetic Monte Carlo.
Acknowledgment. The authors thank Prof. Tonya Klein for
helpful discussions of the experimental systems. This work was
partially supported with the computing resources at the Alabama
Supercomputer Center.
References and Notes
(1) Halls, M. D.; Raghavachari, K. J. Chem. Phys. 2003 , 118 , 10221.
(2) Akamatsu, K.; Kimura, A.; Matsubara, H.; Ikeda, S.; Nawafune,
H. Langmuir 2005 , 21 , 8099.
(3) King, J. S.; Heineman, D.; Graugnard, E.; Summers, C. J. Appl.
Surf. Sci. 2005 , 244 , 511.
(4) King, J. S.; Graugnard, E.; Summers, C. J. Ad V. Mater. 2005 , 17 ,
1010.
(5) Kim, Y. S.; Yun, S. J. J. Cryst. Growth 2005 , 274 , 585.
P f *
P r
) 1.5 (5)
P f ) P r + P f * (6)
P 1 ) P f - P r ) 0.6 P f (7)
P 1
P 2
) 0.6
P f
P 2
) 1.8 (8)
8346 J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 Hu and Turner


(6) Mayer, T. M.; Elam, J. W.; George, S. M.; Kotula, P. G.; Goeke,
R. S. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2003 , 82 , 2883.
(7) Nistorica, C.; Liu, J. F.; Gory, I.; Skidmore, G. D.; Mantiziba, F.
M.; Gnade, B. E.; Kim, J. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 2005 , 23 , 836.
(8) Elam, J. W.; Routkevitch, D.; Mardilovich, P. P.; George, S. M.
Chem. Mater. 2003 , 15 , 3507.
(9) Xiong, G.; Elam, J. W.; Feng, H.; Han, C. Y.; Wang, H. H.; Iton,
L. E.; Curtiss, L. A.; Pellin, M. J.; Kung, M.; Kung, H.; Stair, P. C. J.
Phys. Chem. B 2005 , 109 , 14059.
(10) Pellin, M. J.; Stair, P. C.; Xiong, G.; Elam, J. W.; Birrell, J.; Curtiss,
L.; George, S. M.; Han, C. Y.; Iton, L.; Kung, H.; Kung, M.; Wang, H. H.
Catal. Lett.2005 , 102 , 127.
(11) Liu, S.; Chen, A. Langmuir 2005 , 21 , 8409.
(12) Este ´ve, A.; Jeloaica, L.; Mazaleyrat, G.; Dkhissi, A.; Djafari-
Rouhani, M.; Messaoud, A.; Fazouan, N. MRS Fall Symp. Proc. 2003 , 786 ,
E6.28.
(13) Mazaleyrat, G.; Este ´ve, A.; Jeloaica, L.; Djafari-Rouhani, M.
Comput. Mater. Sci. 2005 , 33 , 74.
(14) Han, J. H.; Gao, G. L.; Widjaja, Y.; Garfunkel, E.; Musgrave, C.
B. Surf. Sci. 2004 , 550 , 199.
(15) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb,
M. A.; Cheeseman, J. R.; Montgomery, J. A., Jr.; Vreven, T.; Kudin, K.
N.; Burant, J. C.; Millam, J. M.; Iyengar, S. S.; Tomasi, J.; Barone, V.;
Mennucci, B.; Cossi, M.; Scalmani, G.; Rega, N.; Petersson, G. A.;
Nakatsuji, H.; Hada, M.; Ehara, M.; Toyota, K.; Fukuda, R.; Hasegawa, J.;
Ishida, M.; Nakajima, T.; Honda, Y.; Kitao, O.; Nakai, H.; Klene, M.; Li,
X.; Knox, J. E.; Hratchian, H. P.; Cross, J. B.; Bakken, V.; Adamo, C.;
Jaramillo, J.; Gomperts, R.; Stratmann, R. E.; Yazyev, O.; Austin, A. J.;
Cammi, R.; Pomelli, C.; Ochterski, J. W.; Ayala, P. Y.; Morokuma, K.;
Voth, G. A.; Salvador, P.; Dannenberg, J. J.; Zakrzewski, V. G.; Dapprich,
S.; Daniels, A. D.; Strain, M. C.; Farkas, O.; Malick, D. K.; Rabuck, A.
D.; Raghavachari, K.; Foresman, J. B.; Ortiz, J. V.; Cui, Q.; Baboul, A.
G.; Clifford, S.; Cioslowski, J.; Stefanov, B. B.; Liu, G.; Liashenko, A.;
Piskorz, P.; Komaromi, I.; Martin, R. L.; Fox, D. J.; Keith, T.; Al-Laham,
M. A.; Peng, C. Y.; Nanayakkara, A.; Challacombe, M.; Gill, P. M. W.;
Johnson, B.; Chen, W.; Wong, M. W.; Gonzalez, C.; Pople, J. A.Gaussian
03 , revision C.02; Gaussian, Inc.: Wallingford, CT, 2004.
(16) Becke, A. D. J. Chem. Phys. 1993 , 98 , 5648.
(17) Lee, C. T.; Yang, W. T.; Parr, R. G. Phys. Re V.B 1988 , 37 , 785.
(18) Heyman, A.; Musgrave, C. B. J. Phys. Chem. B 2004 , 108 , 5718.
(19) Widjaja, Y.; Han, J. H.; Musgrave, C. B. J. Phys. Chem. B 2003 ,
107 , 9319.
(20) Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C. B. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002 , 81 , 304.
(21) Jeloaica, L.; Este ´ve, A.; Rouhani, M. D.; Este ´ve, D. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2003 , 83 , 542.
(22) Xu, Y.; Musgrave, C. B. Chem. Mater. 2004 , 16 , 646.
(23) Halls, M. D.; Raghavachari, K. J. Phys. Chem. A 2004 , 108 , 2982.
(24) Eriksson, L. A.; Pettersson, L. G. M.; Siegbahn, P. E. M.; Wahlgren,
U. J. Chem. Phys. 1995 , 102 , 872.
(25) Santiso, E.; Gubbins, K. E. Mol. Simul. 2004 , 30 , 699.
(26) Hariharan, P. C.; Pople, J. A. Theor. Chim. Acta 1973 , 28 , 213.
(27) Blaudeau, J. P.; McGrath, M. P.; Curtiss, L. A.; Radom, L. J. Chem.
Phys. 1997 , 107 , 5016.
(28) Krishnan, R.; Binkley, J. S.; Seeger, R.; Pople, J. A. J. Chem. Phys.
1980 , 72 , 650.
(29) Boys, S. F.; Bernardi, F. Mol. Phys. 1970 , 19 , 553.
(30) Kinney, J. B.; Staley, R. H. J. Phys. Chem. 1983 , 3735.
Surface Reactions of TiO 2 Deposition onto a SiO 2 Substrate J. Phys. Chem. B, Vol. 110, No. 16, 2006 8347
