Atomic Layer Deposition of Hafnium and Zirconium
Oxides Using Metal Amide Precursors
Dennis M. Hausmann, Esther Kim, Jill Becker, and Roy G. Gordon*
Harvard University Chemical Laboratories, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
Received May 13, 2002. Revised Manuscript Received August 13, 2002
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) of smooth and highly conformal films of hafnium and
zirconium oxides was studied using six metal alkylamide precursors for hafnium and
zirconium. Water was used as an oxygen source during these experiments. As deposited,
these films exhibited a smooth surface with a measured roughness equivalent to that of the
substrate on which they were deposited. These films also exhibited a very high degree of
conformality: 100% step coverage on holes with aspect ratios greater than 35. The films
were completely uniform in thickness and composition over the length of the deposition
reactor. The films were free of detectable impurities and had the expected (2:1) oxygen-to-
metal ratio. Films were deposited at substrate temperatures from 50 to 500 °C from
precursors that were vaporized at temperatures from 40 to 140 °C. The precursors were
found to be highly reactive with hydroxylated surfaces. Their vapor pressures were measured
over a wide temperature range. Deposition reactor design and ALD cycle design using these
precursors are discussed.
I. Introduction
Hafnium and zirconium oxides (HfO 2 and ZrO 2,
respectively) have been extensively studied for use as
silicon dioxide (SiO2) replacements in the gate oxide
insulating layer in complementary metal oxide semi-
conductor (CMOS) devices.1 The same properties of
zirconium and hafnium oxide that make them leading
candidates for a gate oxide replacement also give them
a high potential for application as insulating dielectrics
in the capacitive elements in many memory devices such
as DRAM.2 Both hafnium and zirconium oxides have
high dielectric constants (at least 4 times that of silicon
dioxide); thus, a thick film of hafnium or zirconium oxide
can be used to achieve the high performance resulting
from a thin silicon dioxide layer without the high
leakage current associated with a thin layer of material.
Thermal instability might render thin silicon dioxide
layers unusable even for applications in which a high
leakage current is acceptable.3
In addition to having higher dielectric constants,
hafnium and zirconium oxides are also thermodynami-
cally stable with respect to the silicon surface with
which they would be in contact in a semiconductor
application. Thermal stability is an important consid-
eration for a gate oxide replacement material as current
CMOS and DRAM processing involves high tempera-
tures (ca. 1000 °C) for several seconds. Thermodynamic
considerations indicate that both zirconium and hafni-
um oxides should be stable in contact with a silicon
surface,4 although one report suggests that zirconium
oxide on silicon might produce zirconium silicide (ZrSi2)
after 30 s of heating at 1000 °C.5 High refractory oxides
such as those of zirconium and hafnium also find uses
in optical applications;6,7 as catalysts;8,9 and, because
of their hardness and thermal stability, as protective
coatings.10,11 Future DRAM designs might use capaci-
tors made from long narrow holes with high aspect
ratios in place of conventional flat surface capacitors.2
Atomic layer chemical vapor deposition (ALD) is an
ideal method for depositing smooth, conformal films,
and it offers the additional benefit of precise thickness
and composition control.12
Thin hafnium and zirconium oxide films have been
prepared by a variety of physical vapor deposition (PVD)
methods, including laser pulse ablation13 and sputter-
ing.14,15 Although PVD methods typically allow for a
high degree of control over composition, they do not
deposit conformal films over high-aspect-ratio structures
and typically do not offer precise control of thickness.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
(1) Wilk, G. D.; Wallace, R. M.; Anthony, J. M. J. Appl. Phys. 2001,
89, 5243.
(2) Gutsche, M.; Seidl, H.; Luetzen, J.; Birner, A.; Hecht, T.;
Jakschik, S.; Kerber, M.; Leonhardt, M.; Moll, P.; Pompl, T.; Reisinger,
H.; Rongen, S.; Saenger, A.; Schroeder, U.; Sell, B.; Wahl, A.; Schu-
mann, D. InTechnical Digest of the International Electron Device
Meeting, 18.6.1; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, 2001.
(3) DiMaria, D. J.; Stathis, J. H. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1999, 74, 1752.
(4) Hubbard, K. J.; Schlom, D. G. J. Mater. Res. 1996, 11, 2757.
(5) Copel, M.; Gribelyuk, M.; Gusev, E. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2000, 76,
436.
(6) Waldorf, A. J.; Dobrowolski, J. A.; Sullican, B. T.; Plante, L. M.
Appl. Opt. 1993, 32, 5583.
(7) Urlacher, C.; Mugnier, J. J. Raman Spectrosc . 1996, 27, 785.
(8) Nawrocki, J.; Rigney, M. P.; McGormick, A.; Carr, P. W. J.
Chromatogr. 1993, A657, 229.
(9) Asakura, K.; Aoki, M.; Iwasawa, Y. Catal. Lett. 1988, 1, 394.
(10) Ibe`gaze´ne, H.; Aple´rine, S.; Diot, C. J. Mater. Sci. 1995, 30,
938.
(11) Wang, J.; Li, H. P.; Stevens, R. J. Mater. Sci. 1992, 27, 5397.
(12) Leskela, M.; Ritala, M. J. Phys. IV Fr. 1999, 9-Pr8, 837.
(13) Reisse, G.; Keiper, B.; Wei âmantel, S.; Johansen, H.; Scholz,
R.; Martini, T. Thin Solid Films 1994, 241, 119.
(14) Jonsson, A. K.; Niklasson. G. A.; Veszelei, M.Thin Solid Films
2002, 402, 242.
(15) Qi, W.-J.; Nieh, R.; Lee, B. H.; Kang, L.; Jeon, Y.; Lee, J. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 2000, 79, 3269.
4350 Chem. Mater. 2002, 14, 4350-4358
10.1021/cm020357x CCC: $22.00 © 2002 American Chemical Society
Published on Web 09/21/2002
Downloaded via TU EINDHOVEN on January 27, 2024 at 15:40:38 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


Chemical vapor depositions (CVDs) from â-diketonate
precursors,16-18 alkoxide precursors, 19 and chloride
precursors20 have all been studied. These CVD processes
all require a relatively high (typically greater than 300
°C) deposition temperature, which results in rough films
because of their high crystallinities. ALD has been used
to prepare films using both chloride5,21-24 and iodide25,26
precursors. Although the ALD processes can be run as
low as 180 °C, this typically results in the incorporation
of impurities (chlorine or iodine) into the film. As for
the aforementioned CVD processes, the high tempera-
tures needed to prevent this contamination result in the
formation of highly crystalline films with obvious sur-
face roughness.21,27 Etching of the growing oxide surface
by the precursors themselves also causes additional
surface roughening and nonconformality.23 This etching
might also explain the difficulty in depositing a confor-
mal coating on high-aspect-ratio structures using these
halide precursors. ALD of hafnium oxide from the
anhydrous metal nitrate precursor of hafnium28 has also
been recently reported.
To achieve high-conformality and low-temperature
deposition, very reactive precursors with completely self-
limiting surface reactions are needed. Compared to
metal halides, metal amides should be significantly
more reactive toward a hydroxylated surface (such as
the native oxide on silicon) because the metal-halide
bond is significantly stronger than the metal-nitrogen
bond (both are weaker than the metal-oxygen bond).29
Metal amides of zirconium and hafnium have been
known for over four decades, 30 are thermally stable, 31
and have sufficient volatility to be used in vapor
deposition processes.30,32
The goal of this study was to investigate ALD deposi-
tion using several of the alkylamides of hafnium and
zirconium and to study the properties of oxide films
made from them. We were able to deposit metal oxide
films at temperatures as low as 50 °C that were
impurity-free, conformal, and smooth. The conformality
of these films was tested using patterned substrates
with very high aspect ratio holes and 100% step cover-
age was achieved for all six precursors tested. As with
the aforementioned halide precursors, the films depos-
ited at higher temperatures were found to be rough. The
amide precursors were found to be very reactive with
hydroxylated surfaces and with water. This high reac-
tivity was exploited to estimate the vapor pressure and
sticking coefficient of each precursor using a quartz
crystal microbalance (QCM).
II. Experimental Section
A. Reactor Description. Atomic layer depositions were
carried out in a flow reactor (Figure 1). The reactor was a
stainless steel tube (76 cm in length and 3.7 cm in diameter)
heated in a tube furnace. Precursors and nitrogen gas were
introduced into the reactor through a bored-out flange at one
end of the tube. Nitrogen gas was purified using Millipore inert
gas purifier model VPMV200SI, rated to reduce water and
oxygen to less than 1 ppb each. Unreacted precursors and
reaction products were removed through the opposite end
(exhaust) of the reactor with a rotary vane vacuum pump.
Substrates were also introduced into and removed from the
reactor via a removable flange at the exhaust end of the
reactor. The deposition zone of the reactor was 46 cm long and
was defined by the heated zone of the tube furnace (the surface
area of the reactor wall in this region is 549 cm2). Both
precursors were introduced into the reactor at the beginning
of this heated zone. A 12-cm-long stainless steel Kenics static
mixer (surface area of 89 cm2) was placed in front of the
substrate holder. The substrate holder was a half-round (32
cm in length, 3.6 cm in diameter) aluminum block (surface
area of 306 cm2). The total surface area in the deposition zone
was 944 cm 2. Under deposition conditions, material was
deposited on all surfaces in this region. Metal amide precursors
were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Co. Prior to use in a
deposition experiment, 1 mL of precursor was transferred to
and stored in a 100-mL stainless steel reservoir under a
nitrogen atmosphere. The precursors studied in this report are
summarized in Table 1.
A set volume, 10 or 20 mL, of metal amide vapor was
introduced into the reactor through an electronically controlled
diaphragm valve (referred to as the empty valve). A separate
electronically controlled diaphragm valve (referred to as the
fill valve) separated the defined volume from the precursor
reservoir. This assembly (empty valve, fill valve, and precursor
reservoir) was heated in an oven to a temperature such that
the precursor attained a vapor pressure of at least 1 Torr. Prior
(16) Balog, M.; Schieber, M.; Patai, S.; Michman, M. J. Cryst.
Growth 1972, 17, 298.
(17) Balog, M.; Schieber, M.; Michman, M.; Patai, S. Thin Solid
Films 1977, 41, 247.
(18) Balog, M.; Schieber, M.; Michman, M.; Patai, S.J. Electrochem.
Soc. 1979, 26, 1203.
(19) Jean, T. S.; White, J. M.; Kwong, D. L. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001,
78, 368.
(20) Taylor, R. N.; Dumbri, A. C.; Caffrey, R. E. J. Electrochem.
Soc. 1971, 118, 747.
(21) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Ma¨ndar, H.; Sammelselg, V.; Uustare, T.
J. Cryst. Growth 2000, 220, 105.
(22) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kiisler, A.-A.; Uustare, T.; Sammelselg,
V. Thin Solid Films 1999, 340, 110.
(23) Ritala, M.; Kukli, K.; Rahtu, A.; Ra ¨isa¨nen, P.; Leskala¨, M.;
Sajavaara, T.; Keinonen, J. Science 2000, 288, 319.
(24) Zhang, H.; Solanki, R. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 148, F63.
(25) Kukli, K.; Forsgren, K.; Ritala, M.; Leskela ¨, M.; Aarik, J.;
Hårsta, A. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2001, 148, F227.
(26) Kukli, K.; Forsgren, K.; Aarik, J.; Uustare, T.; Aidla, A.;
Niskanen, A.; Ritala, M.; Leskela¨, M.; Ha¨rsta, A.J. Cryst. Growth2001,
231, 262.
(27) Ritala, M.; Leskala¨, M. Appl. Surf. Sci. 1994, 75, 333.
(28) Conley, J. F.; Ono, Y.; Zhuang, W.; Tweet, D.; Gao, W.;
Mohammed, S.; Solanki, R.Electrochem. Solid State Lett.2002, 5, C57.
(29) Cardin, D. J.; Lappert, M. F.; Raston, C. L. Chemistry of
Organo-Zirconium and -Hafnium Compounds ; Ellis Horwood Lim-
ited: West Sussex, U.K., 1986.
(30) Bradley, D. C.; Thomas, I. M. J. Chem. Soc. 1960, 3857.
(31) Tsyganova, E. I.; Dyagileva, L. M.; Aleksandrov, Y. A. Russ.
J. Chem. 1999, 69, 1532.
(32) van Mol, A. M. B.; Driessen, J. P. A. M.; Linden, J. L.; de Croon,
M. H. I. M.; Spee, C. I. M. A.; Schouten, J. C. Chem. Vap. Deposition
2001, 7, 101.
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the deposition system
showing the location of the nitrogen mass flow controllers (N2),
the water vapor reservoir (H2O), the metal precursor reservoir
(Metal Precursor), the three-way gas-chromatography valve,
the two two-way diaphragm valves, the metal precursor dose
volume (V), the pressure measurement location (P), and the
rotary vane pump (Pump) with respect to the precursor
[T(precursors)] and deposition [T(deposition)] heating zones.
ALD of HfO2 and ZrO2 Using Metal Amide Precursors Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 4351


to opening the fill valve, the empty valve was opened to reduce
the pressure of the set volume between the two valves.
Opening the fill valve for 1 s (while the empty valve was closed)
charged the volume between the two valves with a known
volume of vapor (10 or 20 mL) at a known temperature and
pressure (and thus a known mass). Opening the empty valve
for 1 s (while the fill valve was closed) emptied this dose into
the reactor, which was at a pressure well below 1 Torr. At a
vapor pressure of 1 Torr and a temperature of 75 °C, a 10-mL
dose delivered 0.46ímol (assuming that the entire contents
of the vapor space were delivered). Nitrogen gas flow (constant
during the deposition) was directed at the reactor side end of
the empty valve to assist in the complete emptying of the vapor
space.
Water vapor was introduced into the reactor by the action
of a three-way gas chromatography (GC) valve connected to
the reactor by a stainless steel feed-through (0.04-cm inner
diameter). The GC valve was controlled electronically and
could be positioned in two states to allow either nitrogen gas
(purge state) or water vapor (dose state) to flow into the
reactor. The water vapor was kept at room temperature and
thus had a vapor pressure of approximately 24 Torr. A single
water dose consisted of positioning the GC valve in the dose
state for 0.5 s and then returning it to the purge state. (When
the metal amide vapor volume was set at 20 mL, the water
dose was increased to 2 s.) The GC valve was always kept
(during the deposition) in the purge state except during the
dose state.
During a deposition experiment, the total nitrogen mass
flow into the reactor was 0.025 SLPM (standard liters per
minute), and the pressure of nitrogen in the reactor was
maintained at 0.25 Torr (a gas flow rate of 130 LPM in the
reactor). The deposition temperature was varied from 50 to
500 °C. At least5so f purging was allowed between the
introductions of the precursors. Under these conditions, one
ALD reaction cycle was defined as one dose of the metal
precursor followed by a 5-s purge and then one dose of water
followed by another 5-s purge. At all times during the
deposition, the nitrogen flow was kept constant. During a
purge, no precursors were introduced into the reactor.
All substrates were exposed to a UV lamp (in air to generate
ozone) for 3 min (sufficient to restore the hydrophilic character
of a HF-dipped silicon wafer) immediately prior to deposition.
Silicon substrates were cut from prime-grade wafers (100) and
cleaned in a 48% HF solution for 5 s prior to UV/ozone
treatment. Glassy carbon substrates, for Rutherford backscat-
tering spectra (RBS), were cut from sheets purchased from Alfa
and mechanically polished with diamond powder. Patterned
silicon substrates for step coverage measurements were cut
from a wafer donated by Infineon.
B. Film Characterization.The film composition and area
density were determined from Rutherford backscattering
spectra (RBS) obtained with a General Ionics model 4117
spectrometer. The helium ion beam energy was 2.0 MeV. RBS
analysis was performed on films deposited on both carbon and
silicon substrates. RBS data were analyzed using RUMP
software from Computer Graphic Service (CGS). The thickness
and refractive index were determined with a Rudolph Research
AutoEl-II ellipsometer at a wavelength of 632.8 nm with the
incident angle set at 70°.
The film thickness and density were also determined by
X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements using a Scintag XDS
2000 instrument with copper KR radiation (1.54-nm wave-
length). Low-angle XRR data were collected at 0.005° incre-
ments and 100-s count times on films deposited on silicon
substrates. XRR data was analyzed using the Experimental
Reflectivity Modeling Program, version II, provided by Scintag,
Inc.
Cross-sectional images were obtained with a scanning
electron microscope (SEM) using the FEI Strata DB235 dual-
beam focused ion beam system. Samples were cleaved just
before being loaded into the SEM chamber to maintain a fresh
cross-sectional surface. To reduce significant sample-charging
problems caused by the nonconducting nature of the oxide film,
images were captured in the charge-reduction mode [through-
lens-detector-grounded (TLD-C)]. The applied electron beam
energy was in the range 3-5 keV.
The film surface morphology on silicon was analyzed with
a Nanoscope VI (Digital Instruments) atomic force microscope
(AFM) with a silicon tip (10-nm radius of curvature) in the
tapping mode. One-micron areas were scanned at a rate of 2
Hz at a resolution of 8 bits. The rms roughness of the silicon
substrate was typically 0.15 nm before deposition.
In situ mass measurements were made using an Inficon
Technologies bakeable quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). The
QCM was used to study the reactivity and vapor pressure of
each precursor. During QCM experiments, the substrate
holder was replaced by a mass sensor suspended in the center
of the tube, 27 cm from the precursor introduction end of the
tube (8 cm from the static mixer). The total surface area up to
this measured region was 435 cm2. During QCM experiments,
material was deposited on all surfaces in this region.
III. Result and Discussion
A. Film Depositions. The metal precursors were
found to be very reactive with water, and under condi-
tions where an exactly saturating dose of metal precur-
sor was used, no unreacted precursor was observed. An
exactly saturating dose of the precursor resulted in film
deposition on every surface in the deposition zone (944
cm2) with no film, powder, or residual precursors
detected on any of the surfaces beyond the deposition
zone. A dose was determined to be greater than exactly
saturating (but still saturating) when deposition was
observed beyond the deposition zone. A dose was less
than saturating when the dose did not produce a film
on the entire deposition zone. The temperature of each
metal precursor needed to produce an exactly saturating
dose from a 10-mL vapor space is summarized in Table
2. Film deposition on reactor surfaces was easily con-
firmed by visual observation of interference fringes.
Similarly, it was found by varying the time for which
the three-way GC valve (for water) was placed the dose
state that a 0.5-s dose was saturating.
The mass of precursor in the reservoir was deter-
mined before and after a deposition experiment. On
average, each dose consumed 0.45( 0.05 ímol of
zirconium precursor and 0.41 ( 0.04 ímol of hafnium
precursor, which were precisely the doses that would
have been required to produce films with the observed
area densities (2.69 metal atoms/nm2 for zirconium
Table 1. Summary of the Precursors under Investigation
in This Report
precursor chemical formula
tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirconium Zr(NMe 2)4
tetrakis(ethylmethylamido)zirconium Zr(NMeEt) 4
tetrakis(diethylamido)zirconium Zr(NEt 2)4
tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium Hf(NMe 2)4
tetrakis(ethylmethylamido)hafnium Hf(NMeEt) 4
tetrakis(diethylamido)hafnium Hf(NEt 2)4
Table 2. Summary of the Temperature of Each Metal
Precursor Needed to Produce an Exactly Saturating
Dose for an Area of 944 cm 2 from a 10-mL Vapor Space
precursor
precursor
temperature (°C)
Zr(NMe2)4 75 ( 1
Zr(NEtMe)4 110 ( 1
Zr(NEt2)4 110 ( 1
Hf(NMe2)4 75 ( 1
Hf(NEtMe)4 115 ( 1
Hf(NEt2)4 130 ( 1
4352 Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 Hausmann et al.


oxide films and 2.45 metal atoms/nm 2 for the hafnium
oxide films from both XRR and RBS). The deposition
efficiency of each precursor is thus very nearly 100%.
B. Film Properties. The deposition rate for the
zirconium oxide films (from all three precursors) was
0.096( 0.002 nm per cycle. The hafnium oxide (from
all three precursors) was found to deposit at a rate of
0.093( 0.001 nm per cycle. Film thickness was highly
uniform (less than 1% variation) along the length (46
cm) of the heated deposition zone. The growth rate was
constant (independent of the number of cycles) at least
from 10 to 1000 cycles. The refractive index (at a
wavelength of 633 nm) for the as-deposited hafnium
oxide films was 2.05( 0.02 and for the zirconium oxide
films was 2.10 ( 0.01. RBS analysis (Figure 2) showed
the expected 1:2 metal-to-oxygen ratio. The area density
per ALD cycle was determined to be 2.69(0.03 metal
atoms/nm2 for the zirconium oxide films and 2.45(0.03
metal atoms/nm2 for the hafnium oxide films.
XRR analysis (Figure 3) was used to measure the film
thickness and determine the film density for each metal
oxide. The zirconium oxide films were determined to
have a bulk density of 5.85 g/cm3 (96% of the density of
bulk tetragonal zirconium oxide) and the hafnium oxide
films a bulk density of 9.23 g/cm3 (95% of the density of
bulk monoclinic hafnium oxide). The ratio of the area
density (measured by RBS) to the film thickness (from
ellipsometry) verified the bulk density of the film
measured using XRR. Thickness determinations with
the ellipsometer were typically 2-3 nm greater than
those from XRR. Predeposition treatments on silicon
(HF followed by UV) resulted in oxidation of the
substrate surface consistent with the observed differ-
ence in thickness from XRR (which allows the heavy
metal oxide films and the less dense silicon dioxide layer
to be easily distinguished) and from single-wavelength
ellipsometry (which reports an average for multilayer
films).
The step coverage was determined using a patterned
wafer with elliptical holes 0.17 ím  0.30 ím  7.3 ím
deep etched in silicon. All six precursors gave 100% step
coverage at exposures greater than 6 103 langmuir
(Figure 4). This high exposure was achieved by increas-
ing the dose (allowing a greater number of moles of
precursor to enter the reactor), increasing the time spent
in the reactor (lowering the gas flow rate), or a combi-
nation of the two. Exposures of less than 4 103
langmuir had coating only on the upper parts of the
holes.
AFM analysis of the as-deposited hafnium oxide films
showed an rms roughness that was less than 1% of the
film thickness (smooth films) at low deposition temper-
atures (Figures 5 and 6). The rms roughness reached
as much as 5% of the film thickness for the thickest
films deposited at higher temperatures (Figures 5 and
6). Similar observations were made with the zirconium
oxide; however, roughness was observed at much lower
deposition temperatures. Zirconium oxide films thinner
than 25 nm were smooth (rms roughness of less than
1% of film thickness) when grown at temperatures up
to 100 °C. Smooth films thinner than 20 nm could be
deposited at temperatures up to 150 °C, and smooth
films thinner than 15 nm could be deposited at tem-
peratures up 250 °C.
C. Effects of Nitrogen Purging on Film Proper-
ties. To study the effects of deposition temperature and
Figure 2. RBS data for zirconium oxide (top) and hafnium
oxide (bottom).
Figure 3. XRR data for a thin zirconium oxide film (top) and
a thin hafnium oxide film (bottom). Also shown overlaid on
the data (solid line) are the theoretical points. The results are
a thickness of 39 nm with a density of 5.89 g/cm3 for zirconium
oxide and a thickness of 43 nm with a density of 9.23 g/cm 3
hafnium oxide.
ALD of HfO2 and ZrO2 Using Metal Amide Precursors Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 4353


to determine optimal purging conditions, films were
made using twice an exactly saturating dose (a 2-fold
excess) of each precursor. A 2-fold excess of the metal
precursor was obtained by using a 20-mL vapor dose
and for the water by increasing the length of time the
GC valve was in the dose state to 1 s. Purge times of
less than 5 s resulted in a thickness gradient along the
length of the deposition zone. Films deposited in this
manner were thicker (as much as 0.2 nm per cycle) near
the beginning of the deposition region and thinner (in
some cases, no growth was observed) near the end of
the deposition region. This thickness gradient is likely
caused by non-self-limiting CVD-like reactions or by
multilayer physisorption. As shown in Table 3, increas-
ing the gas flow speed (by increasing the pump capacity)
allowed for purge times as low as 2 s while maintaining
thickness uniformity. It should be noted that a conse-
quence of increasing the gas flow speed was a reduction
in the exposure (partial pressure times contact time) of
the precursor to the substrate.
At temperatures lower than 200 °C, an increase in
thickness (up to 0.2 nm per cycle) was observed (Figure
7). High thickness uniformity along the length of the
deposition zone was maintained provided that a suf-
ficient purge was performed (as dictated by the flow
speed). Increasing the purge time restored the expected
0.096 nm (or 0.093 nm) per cycle thickness (Figure 8).
The water vapor required a longer purge time than the
metal precursors at temperatures lower than 200 °C
(Figure 8). The purge time required to achieve the
saturated thickness per cycle was not found to vary with
metal precursor used. Uniform films resulting from
purging that was insufficient (but greater than that
dictated by the pumping speed in Table 3) were gener-
ally found to contain more mass (consistent with the
observed increase in thickness) but also were found to
be less dense (by as much as 10%). It is important to
note that, under conditions where exactly saturating
doses were used with the minimum required purge,
thickness uniformity was not attained. Under exactly
saturating dose conditions, the film was thicker (up to
0.2 nm per cycle) near the beginning of the deposition
region and thinner (in some cases, no deposition) near
the end of the deposition region. The uniformity and
saturated per cycle thickness of films produced using
exactly saturating doses was restored by an increase in
the purge time. This minimum increase in purge time
was similar to the minimum purge time needed to
restore the saturating per cycle thickness of films
produced with twice an exactly saturating dose.
D. Effects of Deposition Temperature on Film
Properties. At the highest deposition temperatures
used, the as-deposited films were found to contain
nitrogen and carbon attributed to precursor decomposi-
tion (on the film surface and/or in the gas phase).
Decreasing the purge time reduced the time the chemi-
sorbed metal precursor amide ligands spent at high a
temperature and produced pure films with the expected
composition (less than 1% carbon and 0.25% nitrogen).
A summary of the highest deposition temperatures
without decomposition (within 5 s purge time) for the
six metal-precursors is shown in Table 4. At these
deposition temperatures, purge times longer than 5 s
resulted in films containing nitrogen and carbon.
In all cases where the purge time was5so r less and
the deposition temperatures were below those listed in
Table 4, carbon and nitrogen were found to be below
detectable limits (less than 1% for carbon and less than
Figure 4. SEM images of uncoated (left) and coated (right) high-aspect-ratio holes. The white bar in the bottom of each image
measures 100 nm.
4354 Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 Hausmann et al.


0.25% for nitrogen). In the RBS spectra for the films
deposited at higher temperatures, the carbon and
nitrogen contaminations in the film could be clearly seen
(Figure 9). Under these decomposition conditions, the
films were notably thicker near the beginning of the
deposition region and thinner near the end. This varia-
tion is attributed to non-self-limiting CVD-like reactions
(decomposition). It is important to note that, under
conditions where exactly saturating doses were used at
high temperatures and with insufficient purge times,
film deposition was rarely observed in the actual
deposition region. It was later found that, under these
conditions, the majority of the deposition occurred on
the static mixer (in front of the location of substrates).
E. Mass Balance Studies.In situ film deposition at
200 °C was studied in real time using a quartz crystal
microbalance (QCM) (Figure 10). A mass increase after
introduction of the metal precursor was observed within
the sampling time of the QCM (0.2 s), indicating a fast
Figure 5. AFM images of a smooth film (top) and a rough
film (bottom). The area is 1 ím  1 ím. The height scale is
from 0 to 20 nm. The total film thickness is 50 nm.
Figure 6. Film roughness of hafnium oxide thin films as a
function of deposition temperature and thickness.
Table 3. Summary of the Effect of Gas Flow Speed on the
Minimum Required Purge and on the Precursor
Exposurea
flow speed
(L/min)
required
purge (s)
precursor exposure
(langmuir/nmol)
440 2 0.2
200 5 0.4
130 10 0.6
50 15 1.4
a Exposure expressed in Langmuirs per nanomole of precursor.
Figure 7. Thickness per cycle as a function of nitrogen
purging for the reaction of tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirconium
with water at a deposition temperature of 100 °C.
Figure 8. Purge times required to achieve 0.096-nm per cycle
thickness for zirconium oxide films (0.093-nm for the hafnium
oxide) at low deposition temperatures.
Table 4. Summary of the Highest Deposition
Temperature without Decomposition for the Six Metal
Precursorsa
precursor
maximum ALD
temperature (°C)
Zr(NMe2)4 250
Zr(NMeEt)4 300
Zr(NEt2)4 350
Hf(NMe2)4 350
Hf(NMeEt)4 400
Hf(NEt2)4 450
a For a purge time of 5 s.
ALD of HfO2 and ZrO2 Using Metal Amide Precursors Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 4355


reaction between the metal amide and the surface
(assumed to be hydroxylated). Additional metal doses
(beyond a saturating dose) did not produce a further
mass increase, demonstrating that the reaction of the
metal precursor is self-limiting. A mass decrease was
observed immediately after the introduction of water.
The water-associated mass decrease also occurred more
rapidly than the time resolution of the QCM. Additional
water doses (beyond a saturating dose) did not produce
a net mass change, showing that the water reaction is
also self-limiting.
To study the deposition kinetics, the dose was reduced
from a single saturating dose (e.g., 17 mL of vapor at
60 °C) to 12 consecutive undersaturating doses (e.g., 1.4
mL of vapor at 60 °C) (Figure 11). The first 10 pulses
and the 12th did not cause a mass gain, whereas the
11th pulse resulted in the entire mass gain observed
after the metal precursor pulse. This result further
emphasizes the high rate of the reaction, and it was
used to measure the vapor pressure and place an upper
limit on the minimum exposure required for substrate
saturation. The small perturbations observed after every
precursor dose (even those not contributing a net mass
increase) are due to temperature alterations of the QCM
probe caused by gas flow variations occurring during
precursor introduction.
F. Proposed Deposition Mechanism. The mecha-
nism proposed here for the reactions leading to film
growth (Figure 12) is consistent with simple bond-
energy considerations and acid-base theory. The first
step of the proposed reaction is the chemical absorption
of the metal amide [M(NR 2)4] onto the hydroxide-
terminated surface (-OH). This first step involves the
breakage of the metal-nitrogen bond and the formation
of a metal-oxygen bond concomitant with the deproto-
nation of the surface hydroxyl by the amide (the metal
ligand) to form a volatile dialkylamine byproducts. Both
events are highly exothermic as amines are orders of
magnitude less acidic than alcohols (hence more basic)
and metal nitrogen bonds are much weaker than metal
oxygen bonds. The second step of the proposed reaction
involves the same energetic considerations as the first
step. In the second step, water reacts with the surface-
bound metal amides to regenerate the surface hydroxyls
and form additional dialkylamines. The QCM data are
consistent with the proposed mechanism, as the first
step results in a mass increase [two hydrogen atoms
being replaced by a metal atom and two dialkylamides
(-NR2)] and the second step results in a mass decrease
[two dialkylamides (-NR2) replaced by two hydroxides
(-OH)]. Consistent with this mechanism, which predicts
that the ratio of the mass increase after the metal dose
to the mass decrease after the water dose should be 3.28
for the reaction of tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirconium
precursor and water at 200 °C, this ratio was found to
be approximately 3.3 (see Figures 10 and 11). Similar
results were found for the other five precursors.
The duration of the nitrogen purge after the introduc-
tion of a precursor plays a critical role in the thickness
and chemical composition of the as-deposited films.
Although nitrogen gas was constantly flowing during
the course of all depositions, no precursors were intro-
duced into the reactor during the purge. At all deposi-
tion temperatures, it was found that, when the purge
was below a minimum time (dependent on the gas flow
rate), thicker film was deposited at the reactor entrance
and thinner film near the exit. The minimum purge time
required to maintain thickness uniformity is indicative
of the time required to remove unreacted gas-phase and
surface-physisorbed precursors from the reactor. Gas-
phase (and non-self-limiting) reactions are prevalent in
CVD processes, and in the limit of no purge, an ALD
process becomes CVD. As is to be expected during a
CVD process using highly reactive precursors, the film
thickness is usually greater where the precursors are
first introduced into the reactor. An increase in the gas
flow speed is effectively a decrease in the time required
to remove gas from the reactor; thus, higher gas flow
Figure 9. Portion of the RBS spectra for hafnium oxide
deposited from tetrakis(ethylmethylamido)hafnium at 400 and
450 °C.
Figure 10. QCM mass changes during two ALD cycles using saturating doses of the tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirconium precursor
and water at 200 °C.
4356 Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 Hausmann et al.


speeds allow for shorter purge times, consistent with
the conclusion that the observed film thickness gradient
is the result of non-self-limiting/CVD-like reactions.
Improvements in reactor design that reduce turbulence
further decreased the time necessary for removal of
excess precursor molecules. Preliminary results with a
flow reactor where the precursor introduction into the
deposition zone is through a gradual increase in the flow
path diameter (instead of an abrupt transition) allows
for yet faster removal (shorter purge time) of unreacted
vapor and physically adsorbed precursor.
At low deposition temperatures (less than 200 °C), it
was found that inadequate purging also resulted in an
increased film thickness; however, provided that enough
precursor was introduced into the reactor, these films
were found to be uniform. This increase in thickness
while uniformity is maintained is best taken into
account by a model in which the first precursor mol-
ecules entering the reactor chemically adsorb (effectively
irreversibly) on all reactive (hydroxyl-terminated) sur-
faces while additional precursor molecules only physi-
cally adsorb on the first chemically adsorbed layer.
Consistent with this model (increased thickness due to
physically adsorbed species), it was found that heating
or prolonged purging restored the normal saturated
thickness per cycle growth rate. As might be expected
because of the potential for hydrogen bonds, water vapor
required a longer purge time than the metal precursors
at low temperatures. Reduction of the surface area of
this reactor (using the previously mentioned improved
design of the reactor inlet) also contributed to a decrease
in the amount of time needed for purging.
At high substrate temperatures, extending the purge
time beyond that needed to remove physically adsorbed
precursor resulted in decomposition of the chemically
adsorbed precursor. This is evident in the carbon and
nitrogen (from the metal precursor ligands) observed in
the films. The observation of both carbon and nitrogen
in the films produced at high temperatures is consistent
with thermal decomposition studies of the pure precur-
sors.33 Films deposited at this threshold of decomposi-
tion (50 °C higher than the highest deposition temper-
ature without observed decomposition as reported in
Table 4) were found to have a normal thickness per cycle
(albeit with detectable levels of nitrogen and carbon)
consistent with surface decomposition. At still higher
temperatures (100 °C higher than the highest deposition
temperature without observed decomposition), the films
were found to be thicker near the entrance of the reactor
than at the exit, consistent with rapid decomposition.
G. Vapor Pressure Measurements. Two indepen-
dent methods were used to probe the vapor pressure of
each precursor. The first method measured the volume
of precursor (at a set temperature) required to saturate
a defined surface area. The second method measured
the point at which the reactor pressure became higher
than the vapor pressure of the precursor.
As observed in the data from QCM experiments, the
reaction between the metal amide precursor and the
hydroxylated surface is extremely fast. The exposed
surface area of the reactor up to and including the QCM
probe is 435 cm2, requiring a dose of 1.17  1017
zirconium precursor molecules or 1.07  1017 hafnium
precursor molecules to saturate this exposed surface
(measured using RBS and XRR). The temperature and
volume of an exactly saturating dose were measured
using the described experimental setup; thus, the vapor
pressure of each precursor can be measured using
simple kinetic theory. The vapor pressure (P) is simply
the product of the number density ( n) of the dose, the
temperature (T) of the dose, and Boltzmann’s constant
(k). The number density of the vapor in the dose (when
confined to the volume V) is the ratio of the number of
molecules in the dose (N) to their volume (V); thus, the
vapor pressure (for a saturating dose) is simply
The saturation was determined using the QCM. A
saturating volume is just large enough to cause a mass
gain at the QCM probe; a lower volume elicits no mass
gain at the probe, and a higher volume does not increase
(33) Tsyganova, E. I.; Dyagileva, L. M.; Aleksandrov, Y. A. Zh.
Obshch. Khim. 1999, 69, 1598.
Figure 11. QCM mass changes during one ALD cycle using
undersaturating doses of the tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirco-
nium precursor and water at 200 °C.
Figure 12. Schematic of each step in the proposed mecha-
nism.
vapor pressure ) NkT
V
ALD of HfO2 and ZrO2 Using Metal Amide Precursors Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 4357


the mass measured by the probe beyond the mass
gained from a saturating volume. It is assumed that all
surfaces in front of the probe will have been saturated
before the probe is saturated and that every molecule
entering the reactor contributes to the film (100% yield).
The complete saturation of this area (435 cm2) was
verified by placing silicon substrates both within the
area in front of the QCM and outside this area. Films
within the area received saturating doses, whereas films
outside this area had no film deposited on them. For
example, tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium vapor at a
temperature of 70 °C exactly saturated the probe only
when the volume of the dose was 5.6 mL; the vapor
pressure of that dose (at 70 °C) was thus 90.5 Pa (or
0.68 Torr).
A complementary method for measuring vapor pres-
sure was developed on the basis of simple fluid transport
theory. The velocity at which a gas moves through a
pipe is proportional to the pressure gradient along the
pipe. If the pressures at both ends of the pipe are the
same, then fluid (continuum) flow will cease. Diffusional
flow from the precursor vessel to the QCM probe was
on the order of minutes at the operating pressure used
to measure the vapor pressure. If the probe were
saturated within a few seconds, it could be concluded
that the vapor pressure in the precursor source was
greater than the reactor pressure. During this experi-
ment, both valves between the precursor reservoir and
the reactor were in the open state. For example,
tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium(IV) vapor at a tem-
perature of 70 °C saturates the probe (with both valves
open) within seconds at reactor pressures lower than
0.65 Torr, but at reactor pressures greater than 0.70
Torr, saturation was not observed within 1 min; thus,
the vapor pressure was between 0.65 and 0.70 Torr.
Vapor pressure data from both types of vapor pressure
determinations were combined and fit to the following
form of the Clausius-Clapeyron equation
Here, R is the ideal gas constant (8.314 J/K âmol), T is
the absolute temperature (K), ¢H is the enthalpy of
vaporization (kJ/mol), and ¢S is the entropy of vapor-
ization (Kâmol/J). Table 5 shows the results of fitting
the data to this equation.
H. Sticking Probability. The sticking probability
of a precursor molecule on a surface is a measure of its
reactivity with that surface. One measure of the sticking
probability is the ratio of the number of molecules that
impinge on the surface in a single dose to the number
of molecules that actually adsorb on the surface (stick)
per dose. The observation that a single microdose
saturates the QCM probe allows for the estimation of a
lower limit to the sticking probability of the metal amide
precursors on a hydroxylated surface. The RBS and XRR
data both indicate that, for the zirconium oxide films,
2.7 metal atoms/nm2 (corresponding to a minimum
exposure of 3 langmuir) stick to the surface per dose.
The actual number of atoms that impinged on the
surface per dose was calculated using the vapor pressure
of the precursor. For tetrakis(dimethylamido)zirconium,
it was found that the probe was exactly saturated after
11 doses (each dose was 1.4 mL of vapor at 60 °C) of
precursor. Assuming a vapor pressure of 0.258 Torr,
1.15 1017 molecules are introduced into the reactor
during these doses. Under these conditions (reactor
temperature of 200 °C and flow rate of 295 L/min),
approximately 1250 molecules/nm2 impinged on the
surface during these 11 doses. Assuming that 10/11 of
these molecules were adsorped on all reactor surfaces
beforereaching the probe, only 114 molecules/nm 2
impinged on the probe during the 11th dose. This puts
a lower limit on the sticking probability at 0.025. If this
dose is exactly half-depleted as it crosses halfway
through the reactor (57 molecules/nm2 or an exposure
of approximately 68 langmuir), the average sticking
probability is at least 0.05. Similar measurements with
smaller doses gave a lower bound to the sticking
probability of 0.07, equivalent to chemisorption within
an average of 14 collisions. A smaller QCM probe would
be able to raise this lower limit to the sticking prob-
ability.
IV. Conclusions
The results reported here show that the alkylamides
of hafnium and zirconium provide convenient and
effective ALD precursors to hafnium and zirconium
oxide thin films. The deposition of metal oxide from
these precursors was done at unprecedented low tem-
peratures, yet the films produced had no detectable
impurities. These surface reactions are extremely rapid,
irreversible, and self-limiting. These precursors are also
more volatile than any other reported hafnium or
zirconium precursors. In addition to their high volatility,
all of the amide precursors are liquid under the vapor-
ization conditions described; this is a clear advantage
over solid precursors in that the synthesis, purification,
and handling of the precursor is simplified, the vapor-
ization is more reproducible, and no dust or powder
contamination of substrates occurs. Also, alkylamides
produce less corrosive byproducts compared to chloride
precursors, which produce hydrochloric acid. The ALD
promise of smooth, pure, and highly conformal films of
hafnium and zirconium oxides has been realized using
these amide precursors.
Acknowledgment. The etched wafer used for the
SEM images shown in Figure 4 was supplied by Dr.
Martin Gutsche of Infineon Technologies.
CM020357X
Table 5. Results of Vapor-Pressure Measurements for
Each Precursor Fit to the Clausius -Clapeyron
Equationa
precursor
melting
point
(°C)
temp
(0.1 Torr)
(°C)
temp
(1 Torr)
(°C)
decomp
temp
(°C)
¢H(vap)
(kJ/mol)
¢S(vap)
(J/Kâmol)
Hf(NMe2)4 30 48 75 90 78 168
Hf(NEtMe)4 liq 83 113 140 88 173
Hf(NEt2)4 liq 96 126 150 92 176
Zr(NMe2)4 60 49 77 80 77 165
Zr(NEtMe)4 liq 76 106 130 85 169
Zr(NEt2)4 liq 79 108 140 89 177
a Also reported are the normal melting point (for solid precur-
sors) and the temperature at which slight decomposition of the
precursor was readily apparent after 1 h (determined by discolora-
tion of the precursor).
ln(vapor pressure) )- ¢H
RT + ¢S
R
4358 Chem. Mater., Vol. 14, No. 10, 2002 Hausmann et al.
