 ViewOnline
 ExportCitation
RESEARCH ARTICLE |  SEPTEMBER 24 2021
Reactor scale simulations of ALD and ALE: Ideal and non-
ideal self-limited processes in a cylindrical and a 300 mm
wafer cross-flow reactor  
Special Collection: Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD)
Angel Yanguas-Gil 
  ; Joseph A. Libera; Jeffrey W. Elam 
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 39, 062404 (2021)
https://doi.org/10.1116/6.0001212
Articles You May Be Interested In
Waterless TiO2 atomic layer deposition using titanium tetrachloride and titanium tetraisopropoxide
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (December 2013)
Role of surface intermediates in enhanced, uniform growth rates of TiO2 atomic layer deposition thin films
using titanium tetraisopropoxide and ozone
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (December 2011)
Atomic layer deposition of titanium dioxide using titanium tetrachloride and titanium tetraisopropoxide as
precursors
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A (April 2013)
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


Reactor scale simulations of ALD and ALE: Ideal
and non-ideal self-limited processes in a
cylindrical and a 300 mm wafer cross-flow
reactor
Cite as: J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A39, 062404 (2021);doi: 10.1116/6.0001212
View Online
 Export Citation
 CrossMark
Submitted: 14 June 2021 · Accepted: 26 August 2021 ·
Published Online: 24 September 2021
Angel Yanguas-Gil,a)
 Joseph A. Libera, and Jeffrey W. Elam
AFFILIATIONS
Applied Materials Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439
Note: This paper is part of the 2022 Special Topic Collection on Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD).
a)Electronic mail:ayg@anl.gov
ABSTRACT
We have developed a simulation tool to model self-limited processes such as atomic layer deposition (ALD) and atomic layer etching inside
reactors of arbitrary geometry as well the output ofin situ quartz crystal microbalance and mass spectrometry. We have applied this model
to two standard types of cross-flow reactors: a cylindrical tube reactor and a model 300 mm wafer reactor, and explored both ideal and
nonideal self-limited kinetics. The model results are in agreement with experimental results and analytic expressions obtained using a
simple plug-flow model for the cylindrical tube reactor. We also extended the simulations to consider two nonideal self-limited processes:
soft-saturating processes characterized by a slow reaction pathway and processes where surface by-products can compete with the precursor
for the same pool of adsorption sites. Our results show that it is possible to have a self-limited process with saturated yet inhomogeneous
growth profiles due to the competition of reactor by-products. This is in agreement with experimental observations for titanium dioxide
ALD from titanium tetraisopropoxide and titanium tetrachloride precursors.
Published under an exclusive license by the AVS.https://doi.org/10.1116/6.0001212
I. INTRODUCTION
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a thin film growth technique
that has been experiencing a tremendous growth in terms of pro-
cesses and application domains, ranging from semiconductor man-
ufacturing to photovoltaics and energy storage. 1 More recently,
atomic layer etching (ALE), ALD’s etching counterpart, has also
seen a resurgence due to its impact on advanced lithographic appli-
cations in semiconductor processing and the development of
thermal ALE processes.2 Both ALD and ALE are enabled by self-
limited precursor-surface interactions, which underpin their ability
to add/remove material in a controlled way over large substrate
areas and inside nanostructured and high aspect ratio features.
ALD and ALE’s self-limited nature is usually conceptualized
in terms of a finite number of reactive sites on the surface: once the
reactive sites are fully consumed, the surface is no longer reactive
toward the precursor.3 However, this picture overlooks some criti-
cal aspects of self-limited processes: first, self-limited heterogeneous
reactions introduce nonlinear time-dependent kinetics and complex
spatiotemporal patterns in the surface reactivity and chemistry
during each precursor dose. Consequently, the contribution of the
reactant transport of species inside the reactor needs to be considered
when extracting information on the surface kinetics fromin situ
measurements. The transport of species is also key to understanding
the scale-up of a process and optimizing reactor geometry.
Second, the self-limited nature of precursor-surface interactions
is not sufficient to guarantee uniformity over large areas or inside
high aspect ratio features: even without considering the effect of addi-
tional nonself-limiting components, the presence of soft-saturating
kinetics, additional surface recombination pathways, competitive
adsorption with reaction by-products, flux/pressure-dependent surface
kinetics, long surface residence times, or merely insufficient purge
times, can lead to inhomogeneous processes even when the processes
are self-limited. As mentioned in a recent review,4 these processes can
also affect the reproducibility of ALD and, by extension, ALE.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-1
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


In this work, we explore the reactive transport of species under
self-limited processes using computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
simulations. CFD is a valuable tool to predict the impact surface
kinetics and reactor geometry has on metrics such as throughput,
coating homogeneity, and precursor utilization. Examples in the lit-
erature have explored CFD and multiscale simulations to model and
optimize ALD processes.5– 10 Here, we use CFD to address the fol-
lowing three questions: (1) how can we use under-saturated doses to
extract information on surface kinetics from coverage and thickness
profiles? (2) how does reactive transport impact the data obtained
usingin situmeasurement tools such as quartz crystal microbalance
(QCM) and quadrupole mass spectrometry (QMS), and (3) what is
the impact that nonidealities in the surface kinetics have on the satu-
ration profiles and homogeneity at the reactor scale? Understanding
these three aspects is crucial to maximize the information that we
can extract from reactor-scale data.
Finally, one of our goals is to make the simulation code avail-
able to the research community: the simulation tools and some
examples that can be used to reproduce the results presented in
this paper have been publicly released as open source in github
(https://github.com/aldsim/aldFoam) under a GPLv3 license.
II. MODEL
A. Model equations
Our model solves the time-dependent transport equation of
one or more reactive species subject to self-limited heterogeneous
processes inside reactors of arbitrary geometry. Our model makes
two fundamental assumptions: (1) we assume that precursors and
reaction by-products represent a small perturbation with respect to
the carrier gas flow and (2) we consider that the total carrier gas
flow is minimally altered during doses and purge times. Both
approximations are consistent with the way our experimental reac-
tors operate: the carrier gas lines utilized during the precursor dose
and purge operations in our reactor have similar conductances, so
the effect of bypassing a precursor bubbler during the purge times
on the overall flow is minimal.11
These two assumptions allow us to decouple the momentum
and energy transport from the precursor mass transport equation
so that the reactive transport of both precursors and reactants takes
place on a velocity fieldu(x) that is determined by the carrier gas
and the overall process conditions. Under these assumptions, we
can approximate the momentum transport equation with the
incompressible Navier– Stokes equation for the carrier gas,
@u
@t þ (u /C1 ∇)u /C0 ν∇2u ¼/C0 1
ρ ∇p, (1)
which under the steady state flow approximation reduces to
(u /C1 ∇)u /C0 ν∇2u ¼/C0 1
ρ ∇p: (2)
Here, ν ¼ μ=ρ is the kinematic viscosity of the carrier gas,μ is the
dynamic viscosity, andρ is the mass density. Note that this approxi-
mation assumes an isothermal reactor since the kinematic viscosity
depends on the temperature through both the dynamic viscosity and
gas density. This is a restriction that can be easily lifted if the tem-
perature dependence with the surface kinetic parameters is known. A
discussion on nonisothermal conditions is given inSec. II E.
Under steady-state conditions, the solution of the Navier –
Stokes equations results in a velocity field u ¼ u(x) that is then
used as input for the mass transport equations of each of the chem-
ical vapor species. The mass transport equation for each species
can be formulated in terms of its molar concentrationci as
@ci
@t þ ∇ /C1 (uci) ¼/C0 ∇ /C1 Ji, (3)
with
Ji ¼/C0 Di∇ci: (4)
Here, Di is the mass diffusivity of speciesi in the carrier gas.
The molar concentrationci can be expressed in terms of the
precursor pressurepi as
ci ¼ pi
RT , (5)
where R is the gas constant.
Our model neglects gas phase reactions. However, the pres-
ence of nonself-limited processes can be directly incorporated
through the boundary conditions. They also spontaneously occur
whenever the precursor and coreactant are simultaneously present
in the gas phase.
B. Boundary conditions
We codify the reactivity of each speciesi in terms of a wall
reaction probability βi. This term incorporates reversible and irre-
versible interactions as well as any side reaction pathways that do
not contribute to either growth or etching such as surface recombi-
nation. The second term that we need to consider is desorption
from the walls. We codify these processes in terms of a fluxFi so
that the mass balance equation at each point of the reactor surface
can be expressed as
/C0 D @ci
@n ¼ βi
1
4 vth,ici /C0 Fi: (6)
The exact dependence ofβi and Fi on the surface kinetics will
vary depending on the specific heterogeneous processes being con-
sidered in the model. These will be described in more detail in
Sec. II C. Also note that, with this formalism, the transport equa-
tions are the same regardless of the type of process that we are
modeling, encompassing both self-limited growth (ALD) and
etching (ALE).
Inlet boundary conditions need to incorporate the pulsed
nature of ALD and ALE. A key challenge is how to model accurate
pulses when the reactor inlet is not considered in the simulation
domain. Here, we assume that concentration pulses at the inlet that
are characterized by a response timetr controls the steepness of the
pulse: at the beginning of each dose, the precursor concentration
increases linearly during a time intervaltr and remains fixed at a
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-2
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


preset valuec0 during a time equal totd /C0 tr. Then, the concentra-
tion decreases linearly with time over the same internaltr. This
allows us to control the spread of the pulse at the inlet while
keeping the producttd /C2 p0 constant, wherep0 refers to the precur-
sor pressure at the inlet. For reaction by-products (cbp), we assume
that there is no net mass transport at the inlet, by imposing the
condition
ujncbp ¼/C0 Dbp
@c0
@n : (7)
Zero gradient boundary conditions were used for the outlet.
C. Surface models for self-limited processes
1. Ideal self-limited process
A key assumption of self-limited processes is the presence of a
finite number of surface sites. If we define the surface fractional
coverageΘ as the fraction of surface sites that have reacted with the
precursor, the simplest model is to assume that the reactivity of the
precursor is given by12,13
β1 ¼ β10(1 /C0 Θ), (8)
that is, the surface reactivity toward the precursor is proportional
to the fraction of available sites. This model corresponds to an irre-
versible first order Langmuir kinetics, and it is one of the most
widely used models for ALD simulations. The evolution with time
of the surface coverage will be then given by
dΘ
dt ¼ s0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ): (9)
When we consider full ALD cycles with both precursor and
coreactant doses, the evolution of the fractional coverage simply
incorporates the influence of both species,
dΘ
dt ¼ s0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ): /C0 s0n2β20J2Θ: (10)
Here, J1 and J2 are the surface flux of precursor species to the
surface, s0 is the average surface area of a reaction site for the pre-
cursor, and n2 is the number of coreactant molecules required per
precursor molecule required to satisfy the film’s stoichiometry. For
instance, within this approximation, n2 ¼ 1:5 for the ALD of
Al2O3 from trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water andn2 ¼ 2 for
the case of TiO2 ALD from titanium tetraisopropoxide and water.
The wall fluxJi can be expressed as a function of the precursor
pressure as
Ji ¼ 1
4 vth
pi
kT , (11)
where vth is the mean thermal velocity of speciesi and pi is con-
nected with the molar densityci through Eq. (5).
The value ofs0 can be obtained from the mass gain (or loss in
the case of etching) per unit surface area per cycle Δm or the
growth (etch) per cycle in unit of thickness. For the former,s0 is
simply given by
s0 ¼ M0
npΔm , (12)
where M0 is the molecular mass of the solid andnp is the number
of precursor molecules per unit formula (i.e., two in the case of tri-
methylaluminum and Al2O3).
2. Soft-saturating processes
A simple generalization to the ideal model is to consider two
self-limited reaction pathways with a fast and a slow reacting com-
ponent.14 This allows us to incorporate soft-saturating processes
where saturation is not reached as fast as in the ideal case.
If f represents the fraction of sites with the second pathway,
the reaction probabilityβ1 will be given by
β1 ¼ (1 /C0 f )β1a(1 /C0 Θa) þ f β1b(1 /C0 Θb), (13)
where β1a and β1b represent the sticking probabilities for each
pathway andΘa and Θb their respective fractional coverages so that
the total surface coverage will be
Θ ¼ (1 /C0 f )Θa þ f Θb (14)
and the evolution ofΘa and Θb is given byEq. (9).
3. Site-blocking by precursor by-products
Thus far, we have assumed that heterogeneous processes
involve a precursor and a coreactant species. However, reaction
by-products and precursor ligands can play an important role, for
instance, competing with precursor molecules for available surface
sites. In the case of ALD, this can lead to the presence of thickness
gradients in the reactor even under saturation with otherwise per-
fectly self-limited processes.15,16
Here, we implement a simple model that captures the impact
of precursor by-products through a simple site-blocking mecha-
nism. Our model considers the surface fractional coverage of both
the precursor and precursor by-products,Θ and Θbp, respectively.
The simplest possible model assumes that upon adsorption, the
precursor occupies a single surface site, releasing nbp reaction
by-products into the gas phase. These by-products can then adsorb
on available sites. The coreactant is then able of fully regenerating
the surface. This can be modeled using the following equations:
dΘ
dt ¼ s0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θbp), (15)
dΘbp
dt ¼ s0βbp0Jbp(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θbp), (16)
when modeling just the precursor dose. The flux of by-product
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-3
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


molecules coming back to the gas phase is given by
Fbp ¼ nbps0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θbp): (17)
When we model a full cycle, we have to incorporate the dis-
placement of by-products by the coreactant,
dΘ
dt ¼ s0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θbp) /C0 s0n2β20J2Θ, (18)
dΘbp
dt ¼ s0βbp0Jbp(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θbp) /C0 s0β20J2Θbp: (19)
Here, we assume a 1:1 displacement ratio between the by-product
and the coreactant.
4. Nonself-limited and recombination pathways
Another way of generalizing Eq. (9) is to consider
nonself-limited as well as secondary pathways such as surface
recombination that do not lead to either growth or etching. We can
implement them simply by adding extra components to the reac-
tion probability,
β1 ¼ β10(1 /C0 Θ) þ βcvd þ βrec, (20)
where βcvd and βrec correspond to the sticking probability of the
nonself-limited and recombination, respectively.
5. Sticky precursors
The final case that we can consider are precursors that have a
significant residence time on the surface. These may require larger
purge times in order to fully evacuate unreacted precursor mole-
cules from the reactor.
Here, we consider a simple model, where a precursor molecule
can undergo monolayer adsorption on reacted sites. Under this
assumption, we have available sites, reacted sites that do not have
adsorbed precursor molecules, whose fractional coverage is given
by Θ, and reacted sites with adsorbed precursor molecules, whose
fractional coverage is given byΘa. The evolution ofΘ and Θa will
be given by
dΘ
dt ¼ s0β10J1(1 /C0 Θ /C0 Θa) þ k0Θa, (21)
dΘa
dt ¼ s0βa0J1Θ /C0 kdΘa, (22)
where kd is the desorption rate andβa0 is the sticking probability
for reversible adsorption.
A consequence of having this process is that the growth per
cycle becomes larger than the nominal saturation value when the
coreactant reacts with reversibly adsorbed precursor molecules.
D. Transport coefficients
The models described above depend on the values of the kine-
matic viscosity ν ¼ μ=ρ, where μ is the dynamic viscosity andρ is
the mass density of the carrier gas. Pair diffusivities of the different
species in the carrier gas Di are calculated using the Chapman–
Engskop approximation,17
Dij ¼ 3kBT
8p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
kBT
2π
Mi þ Mj
MiMj
s
1
σ2
ijΩD(kBT=εij) , (23)
where σij and εij are coefficients for the pair potential, which is
assumed to be spherically symmetric. In the case of a Lennard-Jones
model, ΩD(kBT=εij) is a function that can be parametrized as
ΩD(kBT=εij) /C25 1:22(kBT=εij)/C0 0:16: (24)
E. Implementation
We have implemented the models described above using the
open source libraryOPENFOAM.18 OPENFOAM solves partial differential
equations using a finite volume method with a colocated grid
approach in which all properties are stored at a single point of each
control volume (its centroid). Interpolation, discretization, and
matrix solution schemes can be selected at runtime. Through
OPENFOAM, we can work with arbitrary reactor geometries, including
1D, 2D, 2D axisymmetric, and full 3D simulations.
In order to incorporate self-limited processes, we have created a
series of custom solvers for both ideal and nonideal self-limited inter-
actions. Volume fields such as reactant and by-product concentrations
are still solved and discretized usingOPENFOAM’s built-in capabilities.
T h et i m ee v o l u t i o no ft h ed i f f e r e n ts u r f a c ec o v e r a g e si ss o l v e du s i n ga
custom solver. Each of the active boundaries is initiated using kinetic
parameters that are specific to eachr e g i o ni no u rm e s h .T h i sa l l o w su s
to incorporate regions with different reactivity, for instance, to account
for changes in temperature or different types of substrates.
All time derivatives are discretized using an implicit Euler
method, whereas linear interpolation is used to approximate values
at cell faces. The use of implicit methods ensures that fractional
surface coverages remain bounded between 0 and 1. The solution
of the resulting system of equations is solved usingOPENFOAM’s
built-in algorithms. In particular, we used OpenFOAM’s precondi-
tioner biconjugate gradient (PBiCG) solver, a standard Krylov
subspace solver that allows the use of a runtime selectable precon-
ditioner. For this work, we used the simplified diagonal-based
incomplete lower-upper preconditioner.
The velocity fieldu used as input for the advection, diffusion,
and reaction equation of gas-phase species [Eq. (3)] has been calcu-
lated using OPENFOAM’s implementation of the SIMPLE algorithm
for the Navier– Stokes equations.19 The velocity fields have been
obtained assuming laminar flow conditions, which is a reasonable
assumption for the low Reynolds numbers involved in the low pres-
sure reactors considered in this work. We have also used nonslip
boundary conditions for the flow velocity, which are consistent
with the low Knudsen numbers in our experimental condition
(Kn, 0:01, assuming a mean free path of 50μm at 1 Torr and
characteristic reactor width of the order of 1 cm). OPENFOAM’s
current implementation naturally allows us to extend the simula-
tions to nonisothermal conditions. We have used these in the past
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-4
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


to model other configurations, such as vertical chemical vapor dep-
osition (CVD) reactors, with strong thermal gradients.20 Likewise,
it is possible to generalize the model to consider turbulent flow
conditions. Both conditions are outside the scope of the present
work. In particular, for turbulent flows, one needs to consider the
effect of turbulent transport, which becomes the dominant mecha-
nism of precursor mixing.
The code has been run both in off-the-shelf desktops and
laptops and in Blues, one of the clusters at Argonne’s Laboratory
Computing Research Center. This allowed us to explore process
parameters in a massively parallel fashion.
III. RESULTS
A. Simulation domains and carrier gas flow
In this work, we have considered two main reactor geometries
shown inFig. 1. The first geometry is a 2D model of a 5 cm diameter
cross-flow cylindrical tube reactor.11 This model reproduces the
geometry of three of the experimental reactors in our laboratory, one
of which is shown inFig. 1(a). We have created an axisymmetric
mesh using OPENFOAM’s mesh generation utility blockMesh. The
mesh used in this work is composed of 9400 cells, with a spatial res-
olution in the downstream direction of 1 mm. Meshes with two
times higher spatial resolution were also created to confirm that the
simulation results are independent of mesh size.
The second geometry corresponds to a large area cross-flow
horizontal circular reactor for 300 mm wafers with 30 mm circular
inlet and outlet and a total diameter of 50 cm. The reactor is 2 cm
tall [Fig. 1(b)]. The mesh has been generated using Gmsh,21 an
Open Source mesh generator, and then converted to an
OPENFOAM-compatible format using the utility gmshToFOAM. The
mesh used in this work is composed of 148 390 cells. Again,
meshes with 2 times higher spatial resolution were also created to
confirm that the results were independent of the mesh size.
The same flow conditions were used for all simulations in this
work. For the tube geometry, we adapted the inlet velocity to
ensure that the average flow velocity inside the reactor was 1 m/s,
which is in agreement with the values expected in our experimental
setup, and considered a pressure of 1 Torr. InFig. 2(a), we show
the steady state magnitude value of the flow velocity as it transi-
tions from the inlet to the wider reactor region. The kinematic vis-
cosity (Table I) is high enough to ensure that viscous terms
compensate the inertial term and the flow quickly becomes fully
developed, opening up in the reactor area without any wall separa-
tion that may lead to recirculation patterns and stagnation points at
the inlet. The Reynolds number is Re¼ 1 for a characteristic length
equal to the tube diameter, which is consistent with a laminar flow
approximation, and a residence time of 0.5 s.
FIG. 1. (a) Simulation domain for a horizontal cross-flow reactor. The 2D
domain has cylindrical symmetry and incorporates an expanding section bridg-
ing the inlet manifold with the reactor tube. A picture of our experimental setup
is shown for comparison. (b) Simulation domain for a 300 mm wafer reactor.
The simulation domain comprises a circular disk with a 50 cm diameter and
3 cm diameter inlet and outlet regions. The height of the reactor is 2 cm. A
300 mm wafer region is placed at the center of the reactor and treated as a sep-
arate area. Only half of the reactor is modeled, with mirror boundary conditions
used at the bisecting plane.
FIG. 2. Velocity profiles for our two simulation domains: (a) tube cross-flow
geometry and (b) 300 mm wafer reactor.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-5
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


In the case of the 300 mm wafer reactor, the velocity field was
obtained assuming 300 SCCM of total flow at a base pressure of
1 Torr. InFig. 2(b), we show the magnitude of the flow velocity at
a cross section located at midheight of the reactor. Both are consis-
tent with stable flow patterns, with an average velocity of 0.5 m/s
over the wafer area. This corresponds to a Reynolds number Re¼
1 and a residence time of 1 s.
B. Ideal ALD process
In this section, we first focus on the ideal ALD model given in
Sec. II C 1. Unless explicitly mentioned, the parameters used for
the simulations are given inTable I.
1. Benchmark with the plug-flow model
In a previous work, we considered a plug-flow approximation
of a cross-flow reactor and derived analytic solutions for the cover-
age profiles for the ideal ALD process.12 The plug-flow approxima-
tion assumes that precursor transport in the axial direction of a
cylindrical reactor is dominated by advection, which corresponds
to a case where the Peclet number, defined as the ratio of advective
to diffusive transport rates, is greater than one,
Pe ¼ uL
D /C29 1, (25)
where u is the flow velocity,D is the diffusivity, andL is, in this
case, the length of the tube. For the value of diffusivity inTable I,
1 m/s axial velocity and a reactor length of 40 cm, this condition is
fulfilled, with Pe¼ 40.
In terms of the precursor pressurep0, the average flow velocity
u, dose timetd, and the same parameters used inEq. (9), the pre-
dicted saturation coverage as a function of the dose time in the
plug-flow approximation is given by the following expression:12
Θ(z; td) ¼ etd =/C22t /C0 1
ez=/C22z þ etd =/C22t /C0 1 , (26)
where
/C22t ¼ 4kBT
s0vthβ0p0
(27)
and
/C22z ¼ V
S
4u
vthβ0
: (28)
Here, the volume to surface ratioV
S is equal to d=2 for a parallel
plate reactor andR=2 for a tube reactor withR being the radius of
the cylindrical tube. In that same work, we also showed thatEq. (26)
yielded excellent agreement with experimental saturation profiles
obtained during the ALD of aluminum oxide from TMA and water.
In Fig. 3, we show a comparison between the simulated
growth profiles obtained with our CFD model and those predicted
by Eq. (26) for the cylindrical reactor. We present simulated
growth profiles along the reactor for three different dose times:
0.05, 0.1, and 0.2 s. In all cases, the average precursor pressure at
the inletp0 is set to 20 mTorr. The results, which have been
obtained for a reaction probabilityβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2, show a good agree-
ment between this work and the analytic expression. A key differ-
ence between this work and the plug-flow approximation is that
the latter neglects the presence of axial and radial diffusion: the
combined effect of these two factors is a softening of the growth
profiles with respect to the predictions of the plug-flow model.
Since our simulation domain incorporates part of the reactor
inlet, in order to produceFig. 3 we had to take into account the
effect of upstream consumption inEq. (26). We did so by consider-
ing an offset in the axial coordinate given by
Δz ¼
ðl
0
z R(z)
R0
dz, (29)
where l is the length of the inlet,R(z) is the radius at that specific
location, andR0 is the radius of the reactor tube. This expression is
the result of considering the spatial dependence of/C22z [Eq. (28)]i n
FIG. 3. Comparison between the full 2D simulation and the analytic expression
under the plug-flow approximation [Eq. (26)] derived in Ref. 12. The results
were obtained for three undersaturated precursor doses of 0.05, 0.1, and 0.2 s,
an average precursor pressure at the inlet of 20 mT orr, and a sticking probability
β10 ¼ 10/C0 2.
T ABLE I.Summary of parameters used in the simulations.
Parameter Symbol Value Units
Precursor diffusivity D1 0.01 m 2 s−1
Kinematic viscosity ν 0.05 m/s
Process temperature T 473 K
Precursor molecular mass M1 150 amu
Surface site area s0 24 nm 2
By-product diffusivity Dbp 0.05 m 2 s−1
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-6
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


the inlet as the radius (and therefore the mean flow velocity)
changes with respect to the radius of the reactor tube.
2. Impact of reaction probability
The reaction probabilityβ10 is by far the most influential factor
in the ideal ALD model. InFig. 4, we show the impact of this param-
eter in the reactor growth profiles: all curves inFig. 4 have been
obtained considering the same dose time (0.2 s) and precursor pres-
sure (20 mTorr) and different values ofβ10.A ss h o w ni np r e v i o u s
works, a decrease in the reaction probability decreases the steepness
of unsaturated growth profiles in the reactor. It is important to note,
though, that a reduction of 1 order of magnitude in the value ofβ10
does not necessarily reduce the total mass uptake by an order of mag-
nitude. Instead, if the reaction probability is high enough, a reduction
in the reaction probability simply redistributes the way the mass is
deposited in the reactor. Only when the reaction probability is low
enough, the system transitions from a transport-limited to a reaction-
limited regime, and the mass uptake is directly proportional toβ10.
The same trends are reproduced when instead of the tubular
reactor we consider the 300 mm wafer reactor. InFig. 5,w es h o wt h e
evolution of surface coverage during a single half cycle comprising a
0.3 s dose and 1s purge. The simulations assume a precursor pressure
of 75 mTorr andβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2. The evolution of the surface coverage
follows the steep saturation profile that is expected from high sticking
probability processes.
In Fig. 6, we show the coverage profiles on 30 cm wafer sub-
strates for increasing dose times and two values of the reaction
probability:β10 ¼ 10/C0 2 and β10 ¼ 10/C0 3. The results show the
smoothening of the profiles and the increase in saturation times as
the reaction probability decreases. This sensitivity to the surface
reactivity at a wafer scale suggests that through a combination of
CFD simulations and experimental thickness measurements on
wafers it should be possible to extract sticking probabilities for self-
limited processes in this type of reactors, similarly to how it is cur-
rently done using tubular reactors and macrotrenches.12,22
3. Modeling in situ QCM and QMS
As shown inSec. III B 2, undersaturated growth profiles carry
out information about the underlying kinetics of self-limited
FIG. 4. Growth profiles for a 200 ms 20 mT orr precursor dose for different
values of the reaction probability β10. Higher reaction probabilities lead to
steeper growth profiles.
FIG. 5. Evolution of surface coverage as a function of time during a 0.3 s dose
and 1 s purge. The simulations assume a precursor pressure at the inlet of
p0 ¼ 75 mT orr, and a reaction probability for the self-limited processβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-7
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


processes. However, the information that they provide is static, rep-
resenting the cumulative effect of a whole dose. In contrast,in situ
techniques such as QCM and QMS have enough temporal resolu-
tion to provide mechanistic information during each dose. One
challenge of extracting kinetic data from these techniques is that
kinetic effects are convoluted with the transport of the precursor
inside the reactor. Here, we focus on simulating the output of these
two techniques in order to understand how the flow and process
conditions affect the measurements.
The transport of the precursor and the reaction by-products is
strongly influenced by the reaction probabilityβ10.I n Fig. 7,w e
show the precursor partial pressure inside our tube reactor model
at different snapshots in time taken at 0.1 s intervals during a single
saturated dose. In particular, we compare processes with three
different values of the reaction probability: 10/C0 2,1 0/C0 3, and 10/C0 4.I n
the high reaction probability case, the precursor is fully consumed
before it reaches the end of the reactor. However, as the reaction
probability decreases, an increasing fraction of the precursor
reaches the outlet. In all cases, we observe a broadening of the
pulse shape due to axial diffusion transport. This broadening
depends on the precursor transport in the inlet region of the
reactor (not shown inFig. 7), and from an experimental point of
view it will be affected by the flow and length of the inlet region of
an ALD/thermal ALE reactor.
Precursor transport and surface reactivity impact how the
shape of the QCM profiles changes as a function of the sensor
position inside the reactor. InFig. 8, we have considered the evolu-
tion of the fractional surface coverage during a single saturating
dose at 10 different positions in our tubular reactor, each placed
4 cm apart. Under the ideal ALD conditions considered in this
section, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the frac-
tional surface coverage and the mass gain observed by the QCM.
The results inFig. 8 show that time delays of up to 0.5 s can
be expected between the first and the last QCM of the array.
Precursor transport is a key factor in this offset, with a small
FIG. 6. Surface coverage for increasing dose times of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 s.
The simulations assume a precursor pressure at the inlet of p0 ¼ 75 mT orr,
and a reaction probability for the self-limited process isβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2 (left) and
β10 ¼ 10/C0 3 (right).
FIG. 7. Precursor pressure inside the reactor during a single under-saturated
dose (0.2 s at 20 mT orr). Snapshots are taken at 0.1 s intervals: (a)
β10 ¼ 10/C0 2, (b) β10 ¼ 10/C0 3, and (c)β10 ¼ 10/C0 4.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-8
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


contribution due to upstream precursor consumption. Upstream
precursor consumption also leads to a change in slope observed as
the QCM moves further from the inlet. This hinders our ability to
extract quantitative information from data coming from a single
QCM within a single half-cycle of a self-limited process without
additional flow information.
We can again compare the results of the full model with the
prediction of the simpler 1D plug-flow approximation for the
tubular reactor. The plug-flow model predicts a mass gain as a
function of time for a QCM located at a positionz given by
Θ(z, t) ¼ e[t/C0 Δt]þ=/C22t /C0 1
e[t/C0 Δt]þ=/C22t þ ez=/C22z /C0 1 , (30)
where [/C1 ]þ is a rectifying function that is zero whenever the argu-
ment is negative. The value ofΔt represents the delay in the arrival of
the pulse, which in the plug-flow approximation is simply given by
Δt ¼ z
u , (31)
where u is the average flow velocity in the tube. InFig. 8(c),w es h o w
the predicted values of fractional coverage with time under the same
conditions of8(b). While the agreement is not perfect,Eq. (30)does
provide a good approximation that could be used to discriminate
between ideal and nonideal self-limited processes from QCM data.
The reaction probability strongly impacts the distribution of
mass gains that would be observed using an array of sensors: for a
high sticking probability process, mass gains sharply transition
from fully saturated values in the upstream sensors to zero mass
gain in the downstream sensors [Fig. 8(a)], whereas for lower
values of the reaction probability [Fig. 8(b)] the difference in mass
gain between upstream and downstream sensors is expected to be
smaller. The use of multiple sensors can therefore be leveraged to
extract quantitative data for a self-limited process if mass transport
inside a reactor is well understood.
In order to model QMS input, we have tracked as a function
of time the partial pressures of both the precursor and by-product
species at a single location at the downstream position of the
reactor. This is a common experimental configuration. InFig. 9,w e
show the concentration of both species for the same two processes
used for the QCM analysis: the reaction probability has a strong
impact on the temporal separation of the traces coming from the
precursor and the by-product. This is a natural consequence of the
results shown inFig. 7, where for high enough reaction probabili-
ties all the precursor initially reacts inside the reactor. At the same
time, reaction by-products are released since the beginning of the
dose. This creates an offset between the two contributions. As the
reaction probability goes down, this offset is reduced, as clearly
seen inFig. 9(b)for the case ofβ10 ¼ 10/C0 3.
This separation becomes more apparent if we break down a
single dose into a sequence of microdoses. InFigs. 9(c) and 9(d),
we show the precursor and by-product partial pressures during a
sequence of microdoses, where each pulse corresponds to a 0.1 s
dose. In the high sticking probability case [Fig. 9(c)], the first
pulses are dominated by the contribution coming from the reaction
by-products, and the transition between pure by-product and pure
precursor signals occurs rather abruptly at 2 s. In contrast, a lower
sticking probability [Fig. 9(d)] leads to by-product and precursor
signals that persist throughout the microdose sequence and a
gradual transition between by-product and precursor signals.
C. Nonideal self-limited processes
1. Soft-saturating processes
The first generalization of the ideal self-limited model that we
have considered is the presence of more than one reactive pathway
on the surface: we have incorporated a second self-limited reaction
pathway, comprising a fractionf of the surface sites and character-
ized by a different reaction probabilityβ1b (Sec. II C 2). This allows
FIG. 8. Simulated QCM traces showing the evolution of the fractional surface
coverage during a single saturating dose at 10 different reaction positions
located at a 4 cm distance from each other: (a)β1 ¼ 10/C0 2 and (b) β2 ¼ 10/C0 3.
In both cases, the precursor pressure is 50 mT orr. (c) Plug-flow approximation
[Eq. (30)] using the same conditions as in (b).
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-9
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


us to model soft-saturating processes with fast initial rise and slow
saturation.
In Fig. 10, we show growth profiles in our tube reactor config-
uration for a self-limited process with a fast and a slow component
for varying fractions of the slow component,f . The growth profiles
have been obtained using the same dose times (0.2 s) and precursor
pressure in the inlet (50 mTorr) for all the cases. InFig. 10(a), the
fast and slow components have reaction probabilities of 10/C0 2 and
FIG. 9. Normalized pressure of precursors and ligand species at the down-
stream position of the tubular reactor: (a) Single dose,td ¼ 0:2s , β1 ¼ 10/C0 2
and (b) single dose, td ¼ 0:4s , β1 ¼ 10/C0 3. (c) Microdose sequence, β01 ¼
10/C0 2 and (d) microdose sequence β02 ¼ 10/C0 3. A high reaction probability
leads to a temporal separation between the precursor and ligand peaks. In all
cases, the average precursor pressure at the inlet isp0 ¼ 50 mT orr.
FIG. 10. Reactor growth profiles for a soft-saturating self-limited model with two
components (a) β1a ¼ 10/C0 2 and β1b ¼ 10/C0 3 and (b) β1a ¼ 10/C0 2 and
β1b ¼ 10/C0 4. All profiles correspond to the same unsaturated dose time of 0.2 s
for an average precursor pressure at the inlet of 50 mT orr. (c) Surface coverage
for increasing dose times using (b) conditions.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-10
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


10/C0 3, and they show the progressive transition from a more steplike
saturation profile at f ¼ 0 to a more gentle, almost linear profile
for f ¼ 1.
In Fig. 10(b), the probability of the slow component is 2
orders of magnitude smaller,β1b ¼ 10/C0 4. The interesting aspect in
this case is that for small values off , the region closer to the inlet
shows the type of plateau that would be expected from a fully satu-
rated process, except at surface coverages that are well below satura-
tion. InFig. 10(c), we show growth profiles for increasing dose
times for the case off ¼ 0:2 and β1b ¼ 10/C0 4. After a dose time of
0.5 s, the process has the appearance of saturation but its slow com-
ponent is still evolving, resulting in a slightly higher coverage at 1 s
dose time. The slow self-limited component could be easily mis-
taken for a nonself-limited component if the timescales for satura-
tion are large enough. If we compare this result with the literature,
there are several examples of this behavior in the case of ALD: for
instance, it has been shown that extremely large doses of water can
lead to slightly larger growth per cycle than the conventional ALD
process.23
If we now consider this model on the 300 mm wafer reactor,
we observe similar trends: inFig. 11, we show the surface coverage
on 300 mm wafers for increasing values of dose times for the same
soft saturating process represented inFig. 10(c). After 1 s, the
whole wafer has almost identical surface coverage, yet it is still 10%
below its saturation value.
A second consequence of this soft-saturating behavior is a
process that appears to have reached saturation but that still has a
measurable variability inside the reactor. Using the 3σ standard
deviation of surface coverage as a measure of within-wafer variabil-
ity, inFig. 12we compare the saturation curve of the soft-saturating
process with that of the ideal process: both curves are very similar,
except that the soft-saturating case“saturates” at a lower value of
the fractional coverage [Fig. 12(a)]. On the other hand, the 3σ
FIG. 11. Evolution of coverage as a function of time for a self-saturating
process wheref ¼ 0:1 and β1b ¼ 10/C0 4. While the fast component reaches sat-
uration after 0.5 s, the remaining 10% of the sites require an order of magnitude
higher dose times, resulting in a homogeneous yet unsaturated profile. A fully
saturated wafer from an ideal self-limited process is shown as comparison.
FIG. 12. (a) Average wafer coverage and (b) 3σ wafer thickness variability for
an ideal and a soft-saturating ALD process. Simulation conditions are the same
as forFig. 10(c).
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-11
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


variability of the coverage across the wafer is much higher in the
soft-saturating case and decreases asymptotically with dose times.
2. Site blocking by ligands and reaction by-products
A second generalization of the ideal self-limited interactions
considers the effect of ligands or reaction by-products competing
with the precursor for adsorption sites. This effect has been well
documented in the ALD literature, leading to self-limited yet inho-
mogeneous growth profiles, as it is, for instance, the case of the
ALD of TiO2 from titanium tetraisopropoxide and water and tita-
nium tetrachloride and water.15,16 Growth modulation studies in
ALD showed that alkoxides, betadiketones, and carboxylic acids are
some of the moieties that interfere with the adsorption of ALD
precursors.24
As described inSec. II C 3, we have modeled the presence of
competitive adsorption between precursor molecules and reaction
by-products by considering that by-products can irreversibly react
with surface sites through a first order Langmuir kinetics character-
ized by a reaction probability βbp0. Under this assumption, the
surface now is composed of two types of adsorbed species, and we
can therefore define a precursor fractional coverageΘ and a
by-product fractional coverageΘbp.
The sticking probability of both the precursor and reaction
by-products is proportional to the fraction of available sites,
β1 ¼ β10 1 /C0 Θ1 /C0 Θbp
/C0/C1
, (32)
βbp ¼ βbp0 1 /C0 Θ1 /C0 Θbp
/C0/C1
: (33)
Consequently, both species are competing for the same pool of
surface sites. The surface becomes unreactive whenΘ þ Θbp ¼ 1.
In Fig. 13, we show the impact that competitive adsorption
has on the saturation profiles in our tube reactor. We consider that,
on average, one ligand is released per precursor molecule. The
by-product reactivity leads to the presence of thickness gradients
even when the process reaches saturation. These gradients increase
with the by-product reaction probability and are mitigated with
increasing precursor pressures. The relative diffusivities of the pre-
cursor and by-product molecules also play a role, controlling the
relative spread of the concentration gradients of both species as
they move downstream in the reactor.
The results inFig. 13 have been obtained assuming a reaction
probability for the precursor ofβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2.I n Fig. 13(a),w eh a v e
explored the impact of increasing reactivity of the reaction
by-product on the surface coverage of precursor molecules. The
dose time (0.8 s) and average precursor pressure at the inlet during
the dose (50 mTorr) lead to a complete saturation of the surface so
that, in the absence of competition, the surface coverage is one
everywhere in the reactor (Θ ¼ 1). As we increase the reactivity of
the surface by-product, we observe increasing gradients along
the reactor due to the fact that, in saturation,Θ ¼ 1 /C0 Θbp.I n
Fig. 13(b), we show the surface coverage of the reaction by-product
Θbp. The fact that the curves obtained mirror those of the precursor
shown in Fig. 13(a) indicate that Θ þ Θbp ¼ 1, as expected from a
fully saturated process. InFig. 13(c), we show the impact of precur-
sor pressure for the case ofβbp0 ¼ 10/C0 3 under the same conditions
used for Fig. 13(a): a higher precursor pressure tends to reduce the
impact of by-product adsorption, as expected from a competitive
adsorption process.
Similar results are obtained on the 300 mm wafer reactor. In
Fig. 14, we show the by-product surface coverage at saturation for a
precursor reactivityβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2 and two different ligand reactivities:
βbp ¼ 10/C0 4 and βbp ¼ 10/C0 3. By-product coverages increase from
the upstream (left) to the downstream (right) position in the wafer,
reaching maximum values of 5% and 25%, respectively.
In Fig. 15, we show the evolution of precursor coverage and
3σ variability for both cases, showing how both processes saturate
at a point where 3σ is not zero. This provides a key differentiating
FIG. 13. Coverage profiles in the presence of competitive adsorption by reaction
by-products. (a) Precursor coverage profile for a process characterized by
β10 ¼ 10/C0 2 and p0 ¼ 50 mT orr. (b) By-products coverage profiles for the same
conditions used in (a). Note howΘ þ Θbp ¼ 1, indicating that the process is
fully saturated. (c) Impact of precursor partial pressure for a process character-
ized byβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2 and βbp0 ¼ 10/C0 3.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-12
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


feature between a soft-saturating process and a process with com-
petitive adsorption by reaction by-products: in the former case, the
3σ variability is expected to decrease, albeit slowly, with increasing
dose times, whereas the variability in the latter remains constant
once saturation has been reached.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this work, we have explored self-limited processes in two
different types of reactors: a cross-flow horizontal tube reactor and
a model reactor for 300 mm wafers. For the tube reactor case, the
results obtained are in good agreement with the prediction of an
analytic model that we previously developed under the plug-flow
approximation.12 The effect of axial diffusion is to smooth the
growth profile for undersaturated doses with respect to the plug-
flow approximation. The plug-flow model also shows a reasonable
agreement with the expected QCM profiles as long as upstream
consumption and propagation delays are properly accounted for.
The plug-flow approximation underestimates the initial rise in
surface coverage compared to the CFD model considering both
axial and radial diffusion, but the overall agreement is good.
The first order irreversible Langmuir kinetics used for the
ideal model is the simplest example of surface kinetics exhibiting
self-limited behavior. In reality, though, many ALD and ALE pro-
cesses exhibit more complex behavior. In this work, we considered
two types of generalizations: we considered soft-saturating cases,
which we modeled taking into account fast and slow self-limited
reaction pathways, and the presence of site blocking by reaction
by-products. Both cases represent examples of self-limited pro-
cesses that can lead to reactor inhomogeneities. In the first case,
inhomogeneities arise due to the timescale of the slow component
requiring unfeasibly large doses to fully saturate the surface. The
site-blocking case is intrinsically inhomogeneous even under satu-
ration conditions.
The examples explored in this work are just two of the many
sources of nonideal behavior. For instance, it has been postulated
that the effective sticking probability of TMA can have a depen-
dence with precursor pressure due to the presence of slow, reversi-
ble intermediates on the surface, something that is also well-known
FIG. 14. By-product coverage at saturation on 300 mm wafers for two different
values of by-product reactivity: (a)βbp ¼ 10/C0 4 and (b) βbp ¼ 10/C0 3. The precur-
sor reactivity isβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2.
FIG. 15. Evolution of the average coverage (a) and 3σ variability (b) in 300 mm
wafers for two values of by-product reaction probability: βbp ¼ 10/C0 4 and
βbp ¼ 10/C0 3. The precursor reactivity isβ10 ¼ 10/C0 2.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-13
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


from the CVD literature.25 One of the challenges of including
increasingly complex processes is the larger number of parameters,
most of them unknown, that are introduced in the kinetic model: a
self-limited process that is soft-saturating and has a slow reversible
intermediate would have at least four independent parameters per
precursor. In some cases, the surface mobility of the adsorbed
species can greatly impact the effective sticking probability, for
instance, increasing the capture zone around islands and steps in
otherwise passivated surfaces.26
One of the challenges of modeling the surface kinetics of self-
limited processes is the scarcity of kinetic data. This is also an issue
for the mass diffusivity of different precursor molecules. Except for
a few of the most commonly used precursors and some recent
studies,17,27 the diffusivity of the majority of relevant species for
ALD and ALE is not known. One way of extracting information on
surface kinetics is through the use of saturation profiles. As men-
tioned above, plug-flow approximations have been used in the past
to model and extract kinetic data from saturation profiles at a
reactor scale. Likewise, growth profiles inside high aspect ratio fea-
tures can be used to extract effective sticking probabilities of self-
limited processes. Recently, the use of macrotrenches has greatly
simplified the characterization of these growth profiles, allowing
the use of techniques such as spectroscopic ellipsometry.22 The
comparison between the kinetics at a reactor scale and inside mac-
rotrenches can also provide information on the impact of the
surface fluxes of different species on the kinetics of self-limited
processes.
One example of the use of saturation profiles to extract kinetic
data is shown inFig. 16.I n Fig. 16(a), we show an experimental
configuration used to explore ALD at rates exceeding 1 cycle per
second (1 Hz). Both precursors are brought into the reactor using
two long injector lines. Precursor doses are so short that it reaches
100% precursor consumption across a 300 mm wafer. Using kinetic
data for trimethylaluminum previously extracted in our tube
reactor and fitted to the plug-flow model, we simulated this process
using the model described in this work. The results, shown in
Fig. 16(b), are obtained after considering three full ALD cycles.
Without any fitting parameter, the agreement between the simula-
tion and experiments is remarkably good, even capturing the pres-
ence of a nonself-limited CVD component at the center of the oval
due to the simultaneous presence of trimethylaluminum and water
on the surface. The main discrepancy between the simulations and
the experiments is near the injection point: our model considers
well-separated pulses, while in reality, the long injection channels
cause a spread of the trimethylaluminum and water pulses, leading
to a higher growth rate near the injectors due to precursor mixing.
Still,Fig. 16 provides a good example of the potential of using
reactor growth profiles as a source for kinetic information of self-
limited processes.
Also, it is important to emphasize that, while we have focused
on the case of ALD, the results presented in this work can be
directly applied to atomic layer etching. For instance, inFig. 8,w e
show the changes in mass as a function of time and reactor posi-
tion as measured usingin situ quartz crystal microbalance. In the
case of thermal ALE, the only difference is that instead of mass
gains, the plots inFig. 8 would represent mass losses. Likewise, the
simple 1D models explored in this work would naturally extend to
the case of thermal atomic layer etching, providing a simple way of
exploring the effective rate coefficients in ALE from etching profiles
using subsaturating doses.
Finally, in this work, we have not considered the effect of high
surface area materials inside the reactor. This is a technologically
relevant case, as one of the key advantages of self-limited processes
is its conformality, and yet the scale up of ALD processes to large
area substrates can sometimes be far from trivial. In a prior work,
we briefly explored the impact of a specific type of high surface
area substrate on the reactant transport of an ALD precursor.28
That simple example showed the formation of a large region
depleted of precursor near the center of the substrate for cross-flow
reactors. However, this is an area that still needs further exploration
and will be the focus of a future work. This is also a configuration
where the symmetry between ALD and ALE breaks down: as the
number of cycles starts to affect the shape and surface area of the
FIG. 16. Comparison between simulations and experimental results on a non-
traditional experimental setup in which subsaturating pulses of TMA and H2O
are introduced locally using a pair of injectors. (a) Experimental setup, showing
a wafer coated at a speed of 1 cycle per second. (b) Comparison between
experiments and simulated growth rates for a speed of 4.17 cycles per second.
At this rate, purge times are so short that there is an overimposed
nonself-limited component. This is captured in the simulation results, which
show the total material deposited over three ALD cycles.
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-14
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45


nanostructures, we expect to see a divergence in precursor trans-
port at the reactor scale for each case.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have developed a versatile reactor scale simulation tool
capable of modeling self-limited processes such as atomic layer
deposition and atomic layer etching. All the process, from mesh
generation to the visualization of 3D results, is based on open
source tools. In addition to the traditional ideal self-limited model,
we have explored soft-saturating processes and the case of competi-
tive adsorption by reaction by-products. In particular, the model is
able to capture two experimental observations in nonideal ALD
processes: the presence of gradients at the reactor scale even under
saturation due to competitive absorption between the precursor
and reaction by-products and potential discrepancies in the growth
per cycle due to homogeneous yet nonsaturated growth in soft-
saturating processes. We have released the simulation code as well
under a GPL v3 license and can be found athttps://github.com/
aldsim/aldFoam.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is based upon work supported by Laboratory
Directed Research and Development (LDRD) funding from
Argonne National Laboratory, provided by the Director, Office of
Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No.
DE-AC02-06CH11357. We gratefully acknowledge the computing
resources provided on Blues, a high-performance computing
cluster operated by the Laboratory Computing Resource Center at
Argonne National Laboratory. We would also like to acknowledge
Shashikant Aithal for his support and useful suggestions for testing
our simulations in Blues.
REFERENCES
1E. Alvaro and A. Yanguas-Gil,PLoS ONE13, 1 (2018).
2S. M. George and Y. Lee,ACS Nano10, 4889 (2016).
3R. L. Puurunen,J. Appl. Phys.97, 121301 (2005).
4H. H. Sonsteby, A. Yanguas-Gil, and J. W. Elam,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A38,
020804 (2020).
5D. Sengupta, S. Mazumder, W. Kuykendall, and S. Lowry,J. Cryst. Growth279,
369 (2005).
6A. Holmqvist, T. Torndahl, and S. Stenstrom,Chem. Eng. Sci.81, 260 (2012).
7D. Pan, T.-C. Jen, and C. Yuan,Int. J. Heat Mass Transf.96, 189 (2016).
8G. P. Gakis, H. Vergnes, E. Scheid, C. Vahlas, B. Caussat, and A. G. Boudouvis,
Chem. Eng. Res. Des.132, 795 (2018).
9P. Peltonen, V. Vuorinen, G. Marin, A. J. Karttunen, and M. Karppinen,J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A36, 021516 (2018).
10V. H. Nguyen, A. Sekkat, C. Jiménez, D. Muñoz, D. Bellet, and
D. Muñoz-Rojas,Chem. Eng. J.403, 126234 (2021).
11J. W. Elam, M. D. Groner, and S. M. George,Rev. Sci. Instrum. 73, 2981
(2002).
12A. Yanguas-Gil and J. W. Elam,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A32, 031504 (2014).
13A. Yanguas-Gil and J. W. Elam,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A30, 01A159 (2012).
14A. Yanguas-Gil and J. W. Elam,Theor. Chem. Acc.133, 1465 (2014).
15M. Ritala, M. Leskela, L. Niinisto, and P. Haussalo, Chem. Mater. 5, 1174
(1993).
16K.-E. Elers, T. Blomberg, M. Peussa, B. Aitchison, S. Haukka, and S. Marcus,
Chem. Vap. Deposition12, 13 (2006).
17D. E. Rosner,Transport Processes in Chemically Reacting Flow Systems(Dover,
Mineola, NY, 2000).
18H. G. Weller, G. Tabor, H. Jasak, and C. Fureby, Comput. Phys. 12, 620
(1998).
19J. H. Ferziger and M. Peri ć, Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002).
20G. Ju, M. J. Highland, A. Yanguas-Gil, C. Thompson, J. A. Eastman, H. Zhou,
S. M. Brennan, G. B. Stephenson, and P. H. Fuoss,Rev. Sci. Instrum.88, 035113
(2017).
21C. Geuzaine and J.-F. Remacle,Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng.79, 1309 (2009).
22K. Arts, V. Vandalon, R. L. Puurunen, M. Utriainen, F. Gao,
W. M. M. E. Kessels, and H. C. M. Knoops,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A37, 030908
(2019).
23R. Matero, A. Rahtu, M. Ritala, M. Leskelä, and T. Sajavaara,Thin Solid Films
368, 1 (2000).
24A. Yanguas-Gil, J. A. Libera, and J. W. Elam,Chem. Mater.25, 4849 (2013).
25C. D. Travis and R. A. Adomaitis,Chem. Vap. Deposition19, 4 (2013).
26A. Yanguas-Gil,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A36, 051510 (2018).
27B. A. Sperling and J. E. Maslar,J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A37, 060907 (2019).
28A. Yanguas-Gil, J. A. Libera, and J. W. Elam,ECS Trans.64, 63 (2014).
ARTICLE avs.scitation.org/journal/jva
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A39(6) Nov/Dec 2021; doi: 10.1116/6.0001212 39, 062404-15
Published under an exclusive license by the A VS
 06 December 2024 13:05:45
