Nanoscale
PAPER
Cite this:Nanoscale, 2016,8, 19829
Received 22nd September 2016,
Accepted 6th November 2016
DOI: 10.1039/c6nr07483a
www.rsc.org/nanoscale
Continuous and ultrathin platinumﬁlms on
graphene using atomic layer deposition: a
combined computational and experimental study†
Bora Karasulu,* René H. J. Vervuurt, Wilhelmus M. M. Kessels and Ageeth A. Bol*
Integrating metals and metal oxides with graphene is key in utilizing its extraordinary material properties
that are ideal for nanoelectronic and catalyst applications. Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has become a
key technique for depositing ultrathin, conformal metal(oxide)ﬁlms. ALD of metal(oxide)ﬁlms on gra-
phene, however, remains a genuine challenge due to the chemical inertness of graphene. In this study we
address this issue by combining ﬁrst-principles density functional theory (DFT) simulations with ALD
experiments. The focus is on the Pt ALD on graphene, as this hybrid system is very promising for solar and
fuel cells, hydrogen technologies, microreactors, and sensors. Here we elucidate the surface reactions
underpinning the nucleation stage of Pt ALD on pristine, defective and functionalized graphenes. The
employed reaction mechanism clearly depends on (a) the available surface groups on graphene, and (b)
the ligands accompanying the metal centre in the precursor. DFT calculations also indicate that graphene
oxide (GO) can aﬀord a stronger adsorption of MeCpPtMe3, unlike Pt(acac)2, as compared to bare (non-
functionalized) graphene, suggesting that GO monolayers are eﬀective Pt ALD seed layers. Conﬁrming
the latter, we evince that wafer-scale, continuous Ptﬁlms can indeed be grown on GO monolayers using
a thermal ALD process with MeCpPtMe3 and O2 gas. Besides, the current in-depth atomistic insights are
of practical use for understanding similar ALD processes of other metals and metal oxides on graphene.
1. Introduction
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has become a key technique for
depositing ultrathin films of a broad range of materials,e.g.
metals, metal oxides, etc. on diverse substrates.1 ALD out-
shines its counterparts,e.g. physical vapour deposition (PVD)
and chemical vapour deposition (CVD), by providing atomic
level control over the metal film thickness, and excellent uni-
formity and conformity at low operational temperatures.2 In
light of these advantages, ALD is also very suitable for integrat-
ing graphene with noble metals and metal oxides. This inte-
gration can maximize the utilization of graphene’s extraordi-
nary material properties towards nanoelectronic and nano-
catalyst applications.3 Specifically, platinum (Pt) on graphene
has recently emerged as a very promising hybridsystem for
solar4 and fuel cells, 5 microreactors,6 and sensors. 7 In
addition, Pt could serve as an ideal contact to graphene due to
its high work function,8 but contacts deposited by PVD on gra-
phene typically suﬀer from poor adhesion, resulting in high
contact resistance and contact delamination.9 ALD, being a
chemical technique, would provide a way to form more inti-
mate contacts to graphene, leading to reduced delamination
and improved contact resistance.10
Pt deposition on various oxide substrates (Al2O3, SiO2, TiO2,
etc.) has been achieved primarily using MeCpPtMe3 and O2 in
thermal11 or plasma-enhanced 12 ALD processes, whereas
ozone (O3) can also be used as a co-reactant.13 Alternatively
platinum oxide (PtO x) can be deposited by employing
MeCpPtMe3 along with O2 plasma14,15 or using Pt(acac)2 and
O3.16 In contrast, ALD of Pt (and other metals/oxides) on gra-
phene remains a genuine challenge due to the chemical inert-
ness and hydrophobic nature of graphene.17 Widely-used ALD
precursors for Pt deposition,e.g. MeCpPtMe3,7 and also others
for Al2O3
18 and HfO2
19 have failed to initiate ALD reactions on
graphene, leading to island growth and slow film closure. In
particular, Pt ALD was achieved exclusively on structural line
defects of graphene due to the enhanced chemical reactivity of
these sites.7,19 While area-selective ALD is practical for creating
Pt mazes on graphene to facilitate certain sensor applications,7
†Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Energy profiles for the
binding of MeCpPtMe3 and Pt(acac)2 on graphene with bare and oxygenated
grain boundaries and graphene oxide (mixture); various minimum-energy-struc-
tures and corresponding relative energies; SEM images after 1000 Pt ALD cycles
on the graphene sample treated with O2 plasma for 5 min. See DOI: 10.1039/
c6nr07483a
Eindhoven University of Technology, Department of Applied Physics, P.O. Box 513,
5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands. E-mail: b.karasulu@tue.nl, a.a.bol@tue.nl
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19829
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online
View Journal
 | View Issue

uniform and conformal ALD would be necessary for depositing
catalysts, electrodes in flexible electronics and solar cells,15
and fabricating three-dimensional storage nodes.11
Chemically-functionalized graphenes (FGs) can be used as
seed layers to initiate conformal ALD growth. For this purpose,
functionalities (adatoms) can be attached on the graphene
surface either covalently or non-covalently or they can be inte-
grated into the graphene lattice structure,i.e. doping.20 Among
the several FG derivatives hitherto identified,21 graphene oxide
(GO) is specifically analogous to the common oxide substrates
(e.g. SiO2,A l2O3, etc.) by accommodating chemisorbed surface
oxygens that could assist the oxide-catalysed redox decompo-
sition of precursors. Accordingly, GO has been demonstrated
as a potent ALD seeding layer towards conformal, uniform and
closed high-κ Al2O3 films.22,23 Similarly, oxygenated step edges
of graphene sheets have been evidenced to enhance Pt nuclea-
tion compared to the non-oxygenated counterparts.24 These
findings show the clear need for in-depth investigations of the
performance of GO in enabling closed, uniform and large-
scale Pt film deposition. Although experiments have shown
that oxygenated surface groups can improve the nucleation of
ALD precursors,22–24 the insights into the involved surface
chemistry are currently very limited.
First principles (ab initio) methods could be very useful to
investigate novel chemical processes, as they require no
empirical fitting parameters. So far, first principles studies
have been performed for investigating many di ﬀerent pro-
perties of graphene, like structural, mechanical, electronic,
reactivity, and so on.3 However, their use for studying ALD
chemistry on graphene has been limited,7,19 whereas numer-
ous modelling studies have been reported for the ALD of
metals and oxides on other substrates ( e.g. Si/SiO2, metal
oxides, etc.)25–27 Only a single study is available to date,7 pro-
viding only limited atomistic insights into the Pt ALD on bare/
non-functionalized graphene, most likely with defects. This
calls for elaborate first-principles studies on ALD of platinum
on graphene and its functionalized derivatives.
On account of the great potential and relevance of Pt/gra-
phene hybridsystems, we present here a comprehensive survey
on the eﬀect of topological defects and functionalization on
graphene’s chemical activity towards two types of commonly-
used Pt ALD precursors (MeCpPtMe3 and Pt(acac)2, Fig. 1).
Employing DFT calculations using a plane-wave pseudopoten-
tial approach, we shed light on the surface chemistry of Pt/
PtOx ALD on various graphene surfaces at a molecular level.
They provide valuable insights into the ALD of Pt on graphene
that could shorten the in-lab process development procedures.
In liaison with computational findings, we also present the
results of platinum ALD endeavours on graphene oxide. In
light of the comprehensive analysis presented here, we
propose that graphene oxide is a high potential ALD seed layer
for achieving high-quality, uniform and closed/continuous Pt
films that could be used in numerous practical applications.
2. Methods
A. Computational details
All electronic structure calculations were done using the pro-
jector augmented wavefunction (PAW)28,29 as implemented in
the ViennaAb InitioSimulation Package (VASP v.5.3.5).30–33 We
used the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) to density
functional theory (DFT)34,35 jointly with a plane-wave basis
having a kinetic energy cut-oﬀ of 400 eV. We employed the
Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange correlation func-
tional36,37 along with the Grimme ’s DFT(PBE)-D3 method
including the Becke–Jonson damping38 to account for van der
Waals interactions on an empirical basis. We note that a non-
local density functional that explicitly treats the pairwise non-
bonded interactions ( e.g. optB88-vdW, vdW-DF/2, etc.) is
expected to predict more accurate binding energies for aro-
matic systems like graphene.39 However, detailed benchmarks
show that the empirical method (e.g. DFT-D3) can successfully
reproduce the qualitative picture predicted by vdW-DF for a
lower computational cost.40,41 Besides, we used the default
accuracy parameters for the FFT grid and real space projectors
alongside a Gaussian smearing of 0.01 eV.
Structural relaxations were carried out using the conjugate
gradient algorithm, where they were considered converged
once all forces deviate less than 0.01 eV Å−1 in two consecutive
ionic steps. Minimum energy paths (MEPs) along the pre-
defined reaction pathways connecting a reactant-product pair
were computed by optimizing several geometries collectively
with the climbing-image nudge elastic band (CI-NEB)
method.42 CI-NEB optimizations were done with a looser con-
vergence criterion on forces (0.1 eV Å−1) utilizing the Hessian-
based (G)-LBFGS43 and FIRE44 algorithms as implemented in
the VTST tool set.45 The Bader charge partition scheme46 was
employed for the analysis of partial charges on individual
atoms.
In order to accommodate bulky Pt precursors and minimize
the resulting self-interactions due to periodic boundary con-
ditions, supercells were kept rather largely in thexy plane (on
which graphene is placed), containing8×8o r larger graphene
flakes (see below for the exactsystems). Likewise, for avoiding
the image interactions, the slabs in each prepared model
system were separated along thez-axis by a vacuum thickness
of 15 Å or more. Due to their large size, supercells could be
integrated in reciprocal-space considering only theΓ-point.
Fig. 1 Chemical structure of the two Pt precursors considered in this
study: methylcyclopentadienyltrimethyl-platinum (MeCpPtMe 3) and
platinum(II)-acetylacetonate (Pt(acac)2).
Paper Nanoscale
19830 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

For investigating the thermal stability of the simulation
models considered here, we used a simulated annealing pro-
cedure based onab initioDFT molecular dynamics (MD) simu-
lations. In this approach, we simulated a temperature ramp
(i.e. gradual heating) from 10 K to a high final temperature,
6000 K. To this end, we ran a series of microcanonical (NVE)
ensembles of 50 fs (total of 10 ps) with an initial temperature
that is determined based on the interval temperature at a
given gradual heating step. It is important to note that this
approach is likely to predict thermal processes occurring at
higher temperatures than in reality. This is essentially due to
fact that the simulated system is heated more rapidly (in the
picoseconds domain), thus is not given enough time to equili-
brate as opposed to the experiments, where heating takes
place in the seconds domain. However, such rapid heating is
unavoidable due to computational limitations, and it is
suﬃciently suitable for quick qualitative comparisons of
thermal phenomena under investigation.
Adsorption (or, equivalently, binding) energy (ΔEp or ΔEc
for physisorption and chemisorption, respectively) of a given
ALD precursor on a given graphene surface is defined as
ΔEp=c ¼ EPG /C0 EP /C0 EG ð1Þ
where EPG is the total energy of the complex of the physi-
sorbed/chemisorbed precursor with graphene, andEP and EG
are the total energies of the isolated precursor and the gra-
phene surface under consideration. Relevantly, eqn (2) is used
for computing the reaction energy (ΔEr) that is required for
converting the corresponding physisorbed species into chemi-
sorbed ones,e.g. viadissociation of the given precursor on the
given surface.
ΔEr ¼ ΔEc /C0 ΔEp ð2Þ
Considering the diﬀerent orientations a precursor might
assume while binding on any given graphene surface, we
carried out a conformational analysis for each system under
consideration. Consequently, we present here– to our knowl-
edge – the lowest possible binding energies, where all reported
energies correspond to 0 K.
B. Experimental procedures
To validate the DFT calculations, Pt was deposited by ALD on
graphene using MeCpPtMe3 as the Pt precursor and O2 gas as
the co-reactant at a temperature of 300 °C for 500 cycles.
Further information on the ALD process and the experimental
setup used can be found elsewhere.11,12 The graphene samples
were synthesized by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on a Cu
foil (Alfa Aesar 99.8%, no. 13382) and transferred to 90 nm
SiO2/Si(100) wafers using the standard poly(methyl-methacry-
late) (PMMA) transfer process.47 To create oxygen-containing
surface groups on the graphene, pristine graphene (PG)
samples were exposed to an O2 plasma. The O2 plasma treat-
ment was performed in an Oxford Instruments FlexAl using
100 W, 50 mTorr plasma at 50 °C. To vary the coverage of the
created functional groups the plasma exposure times were
varied from 1 to 5 min. The configuration of the functional
groups was determined by a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha KA
1066 X-ray photon spectroscope (XPS). After Pt ALD the surface
coverage of the Pt on the pristine and oxygenated graphene
was determined by using a JEOL 7500 FA scanning electron
microscope (SEM). Growth per cycle (GPC) during the Pt ALD
process was monitored on a Pt seed layer usingin situspectro-
scopic ellipsometry (SE). The GPC was determined to be 0.55 Å
per cycle, which is in agreement with that reported pre-
viously.12 The growth rate on the O2 treated sample was not
measured, but is expected to be comparable, since the two sur-
faces are identical after the film closure.
3. Results and discussion
A. Surface chemistry underlying the binding of Pt precursors
A typical ALD process relies on two separate, self-saturating
half-cycles for introducing the organometallic precursor that
carries the desired metal to be deposited, and consecutively
the co-reactant, e.g. oxygen, that also eliminates the organic
parts of the precursor prevailing on the surface.2 The involve-
ment of multiple precursor ligands and surface groups diversi-
fies the ALD surface reactions, thus engenders the complexity
of a complete ALD cycle. Particularly, Pt ALD was shown to
utilize intricate mechanisms that involve combustion, hydro-
genation/dehydrogenation reactions and alike, as revealed by
experimental probing techniques, such as quadrupole mass
spectrometry (QMS), Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), photo-
emission spectroscopy (PE), X-ray absorption fine/near-edge
structure (XAFS/XANES), and others.12,48–55 Most of these
studies probe the Pt ALD mechanisms (using MeCpPtMe3)o n
the substrates with oxides (e.g. SiO2,A l2O3, etc.) or those with a
Pt-based seed layer (Pt or PtOx). In contrast, only one of them
addresses the Pt ALD on graphene,24 whereas another study
focuses on two carbon supports that resemble graphene and
graphene oxide.55 In this connection, molecular level insights
into the mechanism of Pt ALD nucleation on graphene, which
are not visible to experimental techniques, would be valuable
for having a complete understanding.
Regardless of the complexity of the related ALD chemistry,
however, strong precursor binding on the intact deposition
surface is essential for proper ALD nucleation. This, in turn,
determines the eﬃciency of the subsequent ALD reactions.
Bearing this in mind, we limited our simulations to address
only the adsorption of a single Pt-precursor molecule on each
graphene-like surface under investigation. This represents a
subpart of the precursor half-cycle of the very first ALD cycle.
This simplified approach has often been employed for examin-
ing assorted ALD processes on graphene7,19 and other sub-
strates (see ref. 25 and references therein).
Unlike physisorption forming a single type of species with
diﬀerent conformations, dissociative precursor binding might
yield distinct chemisorbed species due to various types of reac-
tions between surface groups and ligands. In an attempt to
cover (part of) these possibilities for binding MeCpPtMe3 and
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19831
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

Pt(acac)2 on a given graphene derivative, we considered a list
of chemisorbed species resulting from the following mecha-
nisms (eqn (3)–(5)).
Bifunctional MeCpPtMe3 chemisorbed species:
2X* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X2-PtMe-CpMe* þ Me2ðgÞ ð3aÞ
4X* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X2-PtMe-CpMe* þ 2 X-MeðgÞ ð3bÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X2-PtMe-CpMe* þ Me2ðgÞ þ H2ðgÞ
ð3cÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X2-PtMe-CpMe* þ 2C H4ðgÞ ð3dÞ
Monofunctional MeCpPtMe3 chemisorbed species:
2X* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X-MeCpPtMe2* þ X-Me* ð4aÞ
2X* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X-PtMe3* þ X-CpMe* ð4bÞ
2X* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X-MeCpPtCH3CH2* þ CH4ðgÞ ð4cÞ
ðX–HÞ* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X-MeCpPtMe2* þ CH4 ðgÞ ð4dÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ MeCpPtMe3ðgÞ ! X-MeCpPtMe2* þ X-Me* þ H2 ðgÞ
ð4eÞ
Only bifunctional Pt(acac)2 chemisorbed species:
2X* þ PtðacacÞ2ðgÞ ! X2-Pt-acacþ* þ acac/C0 ð5aÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ PtðacacÞ2ðgÞ ! X2-Pt-acac* þ acac-HðgÞ ð5bÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ PtðacacÞ2ðgÞ ! X2-Pt-acacþ* þ acac/C0 þ H2ðgÞ ð5cÞ
2ðX–HÞ* þ PtðacacÞ2ðgÞ ! X2-Pt-acac-H* þ acac-HðgÞ ð5dÞ
where X represents the surface binding site that can be either
C or O depending on the functionalization type, whereas X–H
denotes that the surface site is H-terminated. Besides, the
asterisk refers to a surface species and Me and Cp stand for a
methyl (–CH3) and a cyclopentadienyl ([ –C5H5]−) group,
respectively.
While compiling the plausible pathways (eqn (3)–(5)), we
were also inspired by those reported elsewhere.7,12,48–55 We
note that this list comprises– in our view – the most likely
pathways, however, there might very well be other conceivable
pathways depending on the ALD temperature,e.g. via
decomposition of the MeCp moiety of MeCpPtMe3 to form car-
bonaceous species (see ref. 48, 50 and 51 for in-depth discus-
sions). Those possibilities can be explored in an elaborate
mechanistic analysis, integrating sophisticated computational
methods at diﬀerent scales, e.g. ab initio DFT and kinetic
Monte-Carlo (as done for HfO2),56,57 alongside experimental
approaches. However, such a detailed analysis lies beyond the
scope of this study, as we are mainly interested in comparing
the precursor binding aﬃnities of diﬀerent graphene surfaces
rather than a comprehensive probing of the complete Pt ALD
mechanism. To this end, we are confident that comparisons
based on these representative mechanisms suﬃce to draw
conclusions.
B. Binding of Pt precursors on pristine graphene (PG)
We have computed the binding energies of MeCpPtMe3 and
Pt(acac)2 on PG using the model shown in Fig. 2a. Our DFT
calculations predict that MeCpPtMe3 tends to physisorb in a
conformation where two methyl groups are located at an equi-
distance above the graphene surface (withca. 2.8 Å separation,
Fig. S1, † Ori 1). This leads to a mild physisorption of
MeCpPtMe3 that is driven by an exothermic process (ΔEp =
−0.56 eV). Stacking of the methyl cyclopentadienyl (MeCp)
group parallel to the graphene plane would lead to a minute
destabilization of 0.04 eV (Fig. S1,† Ori 2), whereas other orien-
tations result in notably weaker binding. As for Pt(acac)2,o n
the other hand, physisorption is markedly stronger (ΔEp =
−1.15 eV), likely due to the enhanced non-bondedπ-stacking
interactions of the aromatic acetylacetonate (acac) ligands and
the π-conjugated ringsystem of graphene. This could increase
the sticking probability of Pt(acac)2 on the surface in compari-
son with MeCpPtMe3, giving more chance for ALD nucleation.
For the latter, however, the dissociative binding of a given pre-
cursor is the determining factor. In light of this, we considered
s e v e r a lp a t h w a y sf o rt h ed i s s o c i a t i o no ft w ot y p e so fP tp r e c u r s o r s
on PG (as outlined in eqn (3a), (3b), (4a)–(4c) and (5a), where
XvC). In Table 1, we list the computed energies of each chem-
isorbed species (ΔEc)c r e a t e dvia these pathways along with the
corresponding reaction energies (ΔEr,s e ee q n( 2 ) )n e e d e df o rt h e
dissociation of the physisorbed species into the chemisorbed
species. Most relevant chemisorbed species are visualized in Fig. 3.
For dissociative binding of MeCpPtMe3, Setthapun et al.
proposed that the monofunctional MeCpPtMe2 is the domi-
nant adsorbed species during the very first precursor dosing
step of the thermal Pt ALD on various oxygen-terminated sub-
strates (e.g. γ-Al2O3, TiO2 and SrTiO3).53 This falls in line with
the infrared spectroscopy results by Kesselset al.49 showing
that on average one methyl group was liberated per
MeCpPtMe3 molecule during the Pt precursor exposures. Our
DFT calculations, however, suggest that the pathway (eqn (4a))
employing MeCpPtMe2 on graphene requires large (positive)
chemisorption and reaction energies (1.45 eV and 2.01 eV).
This finding weights against the utilization of MeCpPtMe2
species for Pt ALD on PG that lacks oxygen as opposed to the
oxides considered in ref. 49 and 53.
In contrast, the bifunctional MeCpPtMe and the monofunc-
tional MeCpPtCH3CH2 products are significantly more stable
compared to MeCpPtMe2 (ΔEc = −0.20 eV and 0.08 eVvs. 1.45
eV), being the two lowest-energy binding modes (among our
tries). Formation of these products would require the release
of gaseous methane and ethane by-products. Relevantly, the
formation of both by-products was detected using in-line mass
spectrometry during Pt ALD on a plain carbon support with
high resemblance to pristine graphene.55 However, the DFT
results suggest that the conversion of the starting physisorbed
precursors into the final chemisorbed products of MeCpPtMe
and MeCpPtCH3CH2 would only be possible through thermo-
dynamically unfavourable processes (ΔEr = 0.36 and 0.63 eV,
respectively). Likewise, the CI-NEB profiles computed along the
Paper Nanoscale
19832 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

Table 1 Chemisorption (ΔEc) and reaction (ΔEr) energies [in eV] corres-
ponding to the di ﬀerent pathways for the dissociative binding of
MeCpPtMe3 and Pt(acac)2 on pristine graphene, as identiﬁed by “Type”
(see eqn (3)– (5) for deﬁnitions). Physisorbed species (ΔEp)a r e−0.56 eV
and −1.15 eV with respect to the separated species (i.e. precursor and
graphene)
Pathway ΔEc ΔEr Type
2C* + MeCpPtMe3(g) → C-MeCpPtMe2* + C-Me* 1.45 2.01 4a
2C* + MeCpPtMe3(g) → C2-PtMe-CpMe* + Me2(g) –0.20 0.36 3a
2C* + MeCpPtMe3(g) → C-MeCpPtCH3CH2*+C H4(g) 0.08 0.63 4c
2C* + MeCpPtMe3(g) → C2-PtMe-CpMe* + 2 C-Me(g) 3.51 4.07 3b
2C* + MeCpPtMe3( g )→ C-PtMe3* + C-CpMe* 2.48 3.04 4b
2C* + MeCpPtMe3(g) → C-PtMe3* + CpMe(g) 2.20 2.76 4b
2C* + Pt(acac)2(g) → C2-Pt-acac+*+a c a c− 2.65 3.80 5a
Fig. 2 Top and side views of the model systems for pristine and defective graphenes. Respective unit cells are represented by solid, pale black lines.
Colour code, C: brown; O: red; H: pink-white; Pt: grey.
Fig. 3 Various (a– c) MeCpPtMe3 and (d) Pt(acac)2 species chemisorbed
on pristine graphene [and the associated chemisorption energies] as
predicted at the PBE-D3 level of theory. See Table 1 for the pathways
yielding these species. Colour code, C: brown; O: red; H: pink-white; Pt:
grey. Me stands for a methyl (– CH3) group.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19833
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

designated pathways (see Fig. 4a and b) suggest that the
generation of MeCpPtMe and MeCpPtCH3CH2 is kinetically
limited due to the high activation barriers associated with them
(ΔEa = 0.96 eV and 1.38 eV). Therefore, the slow conversion rates
resulting from these high barriers are a likely explanation for
the poor ALD nucleation on the pristine sites of graphene.7
Predicted minimum-energy structures reveal that platinum
atoms in MeCpPtMe2 (Fig. 3a) and MeCpPtCH3CH2 (Fig. 3c)
tend to stay at a non-covalent bonding distance (>3.9–4.1 Å) on
the graphene surface. In contrast, in the MeCpPtMe product
(Fig. 3b) Pt is covalently bonded to the two neighbouring
carbons of graphene (2.28–2.44 Å), which would be required
for Pt deposition on the surface. This diverse binding charac-
ter can be ascribed to the availability of d-orbital electrons on
the metal centre (due to the removal of ligands) and the level
of saturation of the valence orbitals on graphene. In light of
these results, the need for a bifunctional chemisorbed species
becomes evident for proper Pt binding on pristine graphene.
Utilization of Pt(acac)2 for Pt deposition has been limited
so far due to its lower thermal stability, limiting the ALD temp-
erature window.16,54,58 To best of our knowledge no experi-
mental study has addressed the reaction mechanism concern-
ing the Pt(acac)2 chemisorption on graphene. Only Utriainen
et al.54 have shown that M(acac)2, where M = Pt, Ni and Cu,
reacts with gaseous H2 or water to give M or MO products
alongside the common volatile by-product, Hacac. This pro-
vides a good hint on how the dissociative binding of Pt(acac)2
would proceed on H-terminated surfaces, e.g. standard sub-
strates like SiO2,A l2O3, etc., but it does not provide direct
information on other surfaces like pristine graphene or some
graphene oxide types (see below). Nevertheless, unlike hetero-
leptic MeCpPtMe3, homoleptic Pt(acac)2 contains two acetyl-
acetonate ligands with low reactivity towards each other, limit-
ing the possible ligand-exchange reactions. Therefore, we only
studied the most conceivable pathway for Pt(acac)2 binding on
PG, in which one of the acac groups is released (eqn (5a)). A
similar pathway was also considered for Cu ALD on the Ta
(110) surface using Cu(acac)2 as the precursor, in which two
acac moieties are liberated in two consecutive steps.41,59
Current DFT calculations show that the Pt(acac)2 chemi-
sorption through the release of an acac anion yields highly
unstable product species (ΔEc = 2.65 eV). In addition, the
higher stability of the physisorbed species (ΔEp = −1.15 eV)
increases the reaction energy even further, leading to a strong
endothermic process (ΔEr = 3.80 eV, Fig. 4c.). As is evident
from the predicted energy profile, unlike the forward reaction
(i.e. chemisorption, ΔEa = 4.14 eV), the backward reaction (i.e.
reformation of Pt(acac)2, ΔEa = 0.29 eV) requires a significantly
lower energy barrier to proceed. Taken together, these findings
suggest that the physisorbed Pt(acac)2 is the dominant species
accumulated during the precursor dose. Consequently, the
trace amount of chemisorbed products at the end of the pre-
cursor dose is likely to cause weaker ALD nucleation with
Pt(acac)2.
Comparing the previous findings41 of Cu(acac)2 binding on
Ta(110) to the current ones, we note the strong physisorption
of both precursors on respective surfaces as predicted by both
GGA/PBE-D3 and vdW-DF methods. This indicates that ligands
have more influence in physisorption than the metal centre
Fig. 4 PBE-D3 level minimum energy paths corresponding to the
diﬀerent reaction pathways (a, b) for MeCpPtMe 3 and (c) Pt(acac) 2
binding on pristine graphene. First and last points on the reaction co-
ordinate correspond to the physisorbed and chemisorbed species,
respectively. Physisorbed species of (a, b) and (c) are−0.56 and−1.15 eV
with respect to the separated species (pristine graphene and
MeCpPtMe3 or Pt(acac)2).
Paper Nanoscale
19834 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

due to more pronounced non-bonded interactions rather than
bonded (covalent) interactions. Therefore, the main diﬀerence
in the binding of two precursors of diﬀerent metals arises in
the chemisorption part, viz. precursor dissociation on the
surface. Cu(acac)2 chemisorption on Ta(110) proceeds via a
very low activation barrier (ΔEa = 0.21 eV with respect to the
physisorbed species) and leads to a highly exothermic product
(ΔEa = −6.05 eV), making the process kinetically and thermo-
dynamically accessible.41 The large stabilization of the chemi-
sorbed product can be attributed to the covalent attachment of
one (or both) acac ligands on the Ta(110) surface, which neu-
tralizes the charge on the ligand(s). In sharp contrast, our
DFT-level optimizations predict that the PG does not tend to
bind the liberated acac and the charge separated species,
C-Ptacac+* and acac−
(g) prevail (see e.g. Fig. 3d). This point
underlines the key role of ligands also in the precursor chemi-
sorption on account of their chemical compatibility with the
deposition surface.
C. Pt ALD on graphene with topological defects
Owing to its sp2-type carbon constituents, pristine graphene
has no dangling bonds or native oxides, rendering it inactive
towards ALD nucleation. In contrast, topological defects can
break the π-conjugation network on graphene, and thus
enhance the ALD activity locally through dangling bonds.
Accordingly, previous attempts for Pt ALD using the
MeCpPtMe3 precursor and air as the co-reactant (i.e. oxygen
provider) resulted in partial deposition exclusively at the gra-
phene line defects.7 To check if this area-selective Pt depo-
sition could simply be envisioned by the stronger adsorption
of a single precursor molecule, we computed the MeCpPtMe3
physisorption and chemisorption energies using the models of
pristine and defective graphene (see Fig. 2) and the lowest-
energy varieties are listed in Table 2. In particular, we con-
sidered the point defects (i.e. mono- and di-vacancies that were
predicted to display the highest reactivity among others),60 as
well as line defects ( i.e. grain boundaries, GBs). From the
plethora of structural models used for describing GBs (see for
instance ref. 61 and 62), for our simulations we used the one
constructed from STM images,viz. the 558-type.63 Relevantly,
this 558-type GB was shown to have the highest aﬃnity for H
adatoms among several others.64
By means of their enhanced chemical reactivity,64,65 grain
boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline graphene are more suscep-
tible to adatom additions upon contact with air,66 or water67
and via specialized procedures, e.g. nitridation.68 With this in
mind, we also prepared oxygenated and hydrogenated GB
models, decorated with epoxy, hydroxyl or hydrogen groups, as
also observed experimentally.69,70 Optimized DFT geometries
(see Fig. 5) demonstrate that oxygenation or hydrogenation of
GBs leads to the buckling of the graphene basal plane due to
sp3-hybridization of the carbon bonds. This is in line with the
formation of folds and cracks at functionalized line defects as
detected experimentally.71,72
In terms of physical adsorption, all defective graphenes
(except the one with MV) can only aﬀord somewhat weaker
binding of MeCpPtMe 3 compared to pristine graphene
(Table 2). This might be related to the distortedπ–cation inter-
actions between the Pt centre and the graphene basal plane,
following from the interruptedπ-conjugation network on gra-
phene. In contrast, graphene with MV shows an augmented
MeCpPtMe3 physisorption (−0.83 vs. −0.56 eV). This is poss-
ibly due to the enhanced Coulomb interactions following from
the charge transfer (ofca. 0.30e− as predicted by Bader ana-
lysis) from the closest precursor methyl group to the graphene
defect site, triggered by the missing carbon atom. Besides,
simultaneous binding of multiple precursor molecules leads
to stronger physisorption, as is evident from the computed
energies (ΔEp per precursor are−0.51, −0.62 and−0.75 eV for
1–3 precursors being adsorbed simultaneously on graphene
with bare GB, see Fig. S2†). Therefore, as opposed to the sim-
plified model used here (comprising a single precursor), a
real-life ALD process will be further facilitated by the surplus
of precursor molecules simultaneously adsorbed on the
surface.
As demonstrated earlier, dissociative binding of
MeCpPtMe3 on PG is not energetically feasible due to the
endothermic character of the pertinent reactions and the high
kinetic barriers associated with them. Conversely, the point
Table 2 Computed physisorption (ΔEp), chemisorption (ΔEc) and reac-
tion (ΔEr) energies [in eV] of MeCpPtMe3 on pristine and defective gra-
phenes. ΔEc values are only reported for the lowest-energy chemi-
sorbed species, as identi ﬁed by “Type” (see eqn (3) and (4) for
deﬁnitions)
System ΔEp ΔEc ΔEr Type
Pristine Graphene (PG) −0.56 −0.20 0.36 3a
Graphene with monovacancy (MV) −0.83 −3.16 −2.33 3a
Graphene with 585 divacancy (DV) −0.59 −0.91 −0.32 3a
Graphene with Grain Boundary (GB) −0.51 −1.12 −0.61 3a
GB – oxygenated Epoxy −0.40 −3.13 −2.73 4a
GB – oxygenated hydroxyl −0.49 −3.91 −3.42 4d
GB – Hydrogenated −0.48 0.38 0.86 4d
Fig. 5 Ball-and-stick representation of the lowest-energy chemisorbed
MeCpPtMe3 species on various graphene surfaces. Relative energies
with respect to the separated species are given in brackets. Colour code,
C: brown; O: red; H: pink-white; Pt: grey.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19835
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

(MV and DV) and line defects (GB) bring about an improved
chemisorption of MeCpPtMe 3 with the energies of −3.16,
−0.91 and −1.12 eV, respectively, congruent to their profound
higher reactivity compared to PG. In line with the latter, the
conversion of the physisorbed species into chemisorbed pro-
ducts is associated with highly exothermic reactions (Table 2).
On the other hand, functionalization of the defects (con-
sidered here only for GB) has a noticeable eﬀect on the chemi-
cal precursor adsorption. Specifically, oxygenation boosts the
chemisorption on GBs even further regardless of which form
is present, epoxy (−3.13 eV) or hydroxyl (−3.91 eV), in compari-
son with the bare GB (−1.12 eV). Congruently, these processes
are predicted to proceedvia very low barriers (ca. 0.15 eV and
0.05 eV, see Fig. S3†). In contrast, the addition of H adatoms
results in the passivation of GB as is evident from higher (and
positive) chemisorption energy (0.38 eV), rendering the rele-
vant reaction thermodynamically unfavourable. Current DFT
energetics suggest that the oxygenation of GBs leads to
better chemical reactivity and thus enhanced ALD initiation,
whereas hydrogenation might be used to passivate the grain
boundaries towards ALD nucleation. In this framework, the
tandem use of oxygenation and hydrogenation can oﬀer a
good pathway for area selective deposition of Pt through
activating/deactivating topological defects. Relevantly, oxygen-
ation naturally occurs upon exposure of GBs to air or water,
whereas UV/ozone treatments73,74 are also used towards this
end. As for hydrogenation, mild H2 plasma treatments are per-
formed75 alongside other techniques (see ref. 76 and refer-
ences therein).
Analysing the minimum-energy pathways, we note the
diversity in the chemisorbed MeCpPtMe3 species depending
on the surface composition (see Fig. 5 for product geometries).
Particularly, the ethane (Me2) release mechanism ( viz. eqn
(3a)) yielding bifunctional MeCpPtMe products is commonly
employed for binding on native graphene surfaces without any
chemical functionalization, e.g. pristine as well as defective
graphene (MV, DV, and GB). As for epoxydated GB,
MeCpPtMe3 is predicted to transfer one of its three methyl
groups, leading to a monofunctional MeCpPtMe2 product (viz.
eqn (4a)). Unlike epoxydated GB, the H-terminated surfaces
(e.g. hydroxylated and hydrogenated GB) employ the pathway
(viz. eqn (4d)) in which a hydrogen atom is abstracted from the
surface to liberate gaseous methane (CH4).
D. Deposition on graphene with chemical functionalization–
graphene oxide
As previously discussed, specific functionalization types (e.g.
oxygenation) can boost the binding aﬃnity of graphene topo-
logical defects for ALD precursors. Rather than relying on
randomly distributed defects, the whole graphene surface can
in principal be functionalized to facilitate non-localized ALD
nucleation. The latter is expected to lead to Frank–van der
Merwe type (non-localized) growth, with concomitant formation
of conformal and closed films on graphene. Among several
functionalization types, graphene oxide (GO) has great potential
for facilitating uniform and closed Pt film deposition in
consideration of the ALD seeding performance of GO reported
for Al2O3,22,23 along with its tuneable, finite bandgap.22,77
D1. Various structural models of graphene oxide and their
thermal stabilities.GO can be prepared by covalently attaching
epoxy and hydroxyl groups on the graphene basal plane or by
adding carbonyl and carboxyl groups to the graphene edges.78
However, there is a long-lasting controversy over the compo-
sition and distribution of these groups. Several approaches
involving wet-chemistry, UV-ozone and plasma-treatments
have been employed in the literature to create oxygenated
graphenes with a highly diverse surface
morphology.20,22,23,70,73,74,78–81 In particular, wet chemical
methods, such as Hummer’s method, yield GO flakes with
random distributions of epoxy and hydroxyl groups. 82
Concomitant sp2 to sp3 conversion of C–C bonds triggers the
out-of-plane distortion of the basal plane even at low oxygen
loads (C/O = 5 : 1).83 In contrast, mild O2 plasma treatments
can be used to decorate the entire graphene surface more
homogeneously that would be practical for depositing
uniform, wafer-scale films.22,23 Particularly, O2 plasma was
shown to create epoxy groups more predominantly than
hydroxyl groups (as endorsed by synchrotron-radiation photo-
emission spectroscopy (SRPES) analysis).22 On account of the
diversity in the models to represent the GO surface, we have
utilized here a comprehensive collection of GO models for
studying the ALD nucleation of two Pt precursors (Fig. 6),
covering both cases in which one or both sides of a given gra-
phene is functionalized. Considering that graphene is com-
monly placed on a support, e.g. graphite, copper or SiO 2,
during the functionalization process (as also done in ref. 22
and 23 and here, see below), it is likely that the functionalities
will be attached to the accessible side rather than both sides.
A previous DFT study showed that epoxy groups prefer to
agglomerate with a linear alignment either by binding directly
next to a pre-existing epoxy group on the surface or by relocat-
ing themselves on the graphene platelet.84 Epoxy clusters were
proposed to enforce the unzipping of the C–C bonds on the
graphene lattice by exerting a collective tension, resulting in
the doping of oxygens into the basal plane.84 Relevantly, our
DFT-level optimizations (of both the supercells and the ionic
positions) of the epoxydated graphene model with the linear
arrangement of epoxy groups (see Fig. 6a and b) endorse the
lengthening of C–C bonds upon attachment of a bridging
oxygen (from PG: 1.425 Å to GO: 1.502 Å). Yet, these bonds do
not readily rupture, preventing the unzipping and concomitant
oxygen doping. To scrutinize this further, we performed a
DFT-level temperature ramp simulation (see section 2) using
the same epoxydated model. The latter reveals that the release
of gaseous O2 from the surface would occur more readily at
relatively lower temperatures (around 2400 K) rather than the
unzipping/oxygen-doping of graphene oxide (around 3100 K)
that is coupled with multiple local defect formation. This
dispute in the findings of the current study and ref. 84 can be
ascribed to the diﬀerent simulation models adopted in two
studies (i.e. the current periodic model vs. the small cluster
model in ref. 84).
Paper Nanoscale
19836 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

Hydroxyl groups can coexist with epoxy groups on the GO
surface, a relative amount of which depends on the method
used for preparing the GO (e.g. very low following an O 2
plasma treatment). Another DFT investigation has shown that
it is energetically favourable for the hydroxyl groups to form
strips as for the epoxide groups. Conversely, the epoxide and
hydroxyl strips tend to coalesce with non-functionalized sp2-
carbon strips separating them.77 Considering these findings,
Fig. 6 Ball-and-stick representation of the models (supercells) used for simulating graphene oxide in the current DFT calculations. Colour code, C:
brown; O: red; H: pink-white; Pt: grey.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19837
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

we have employed linearly decorated models of epoxydated
and hydroxylated graphenes and their mixture (see Fig. 6a–f)
in our DFT calculations. Despite their low likelihood to form,
we also study the epoxy-doped models (Fig. 6g and h) for inves-
tigating the eﬀect of oxygen doping on ALD reactivity (see
below). One should note that the hydroxyl-doped model is not
stable following from the excessive amount of cationic oxygens
and thus not reported here.
Current DFT calculations point out that the distribution and
amount of the oxygen-containing groups on the surface deter-
mines the planarity of the resulting graphene oxide layer. As is
evident from the optimized structures (Fig. 6a –e), ideally
homogeneous (ordered) decorations of epoxy or hydroxyl
groups (or their mixtures) lead to rather planar GO layers by
preserving a balanced composition of sp 2 and sp3 carbon
bonds. In contrast, random distributions of these functionali-
ties will likely result in more sp3 carbon bonds and in turn a
graphene basal plane will be more buckled (see Fig. 6f), as is
observed for GOs created by wet-chemical techniques.83 A
buckled, semi-amorphous GO layer, however, would be in-
convenient for ALD seeding layer applications, as it would
hamper the control over the uniformity/thickness of the result-
ing deposited films. On the other hand, the functionalization
of either one side or both sides of graphene has a less pro-
minent eﬀect on the planarity, provided that the homogeneous
decorations of the surface groups are achieved.
In order to compare the relative thermal stability of the GO
models under investigation (Fig. 6), we have to run a series of
ab initio temperature ramp simulations using these models.
From these, we primarily note that the release of gaseous
watervia combination of the neighbouring hydroxyl groups
starts to occur at lower temperatures compared to the release
of epoxy groups as O2 gas (ca. 400 Kvs. 2400 K). This points to
the relatively higher stability of the epoxy groups compared to
hydroxyl groups in accordance with the previous theoretical
and experimental reports. 85–87 In particular, two adjacent
hydroxyl groups are predicted to combine readily to form water
and epoxy (an exothermic process with a predicted barrier of
0.45 eV),87 whereas the reverse process of converting epoxy
groups to hydroxyl groups upon contact with water would not
be feasible as it involves high barriers (as predicted to beca.
0.90 eV).87
Another important remark considering the temperature
ramping simulations is the increased stability of the double-
sided functionalized models with respect to the single-sided
ones. Functionalization of both graphene facets augments the
stability of hydroxyl groups significantly at an increasing rate
with higher oxygen loading rates,e.g. first water release is at
ca. 1700 K for 25% oxygen loading and 2000 K for 50% cover-
age. In contrast, being already stable constructions, the epoxy
groups do not benefit as much as in the case of hydroxyls from
the saturation of the dangling bonds on graphene (first O2
release at ca. 2400 K vs. 3000 K for single- and double-sided
epoxydated graphene, with 25% and 50% loadings). In this
connection, we anticipate that a graphene support/substrate
will provide similar stabilization on the chemisorbed function-
alities by capping the dangling bonds on the other (non-func-
tionalized) facet of graphene.
On the other hand, we note that doping of epoxy groups
into the graphene lattice creates more stable structures com-
pared to those wherein functionalities are attached to the
surface. In detail, the“single-sided” doped graphene (Fig. 6g)
with 25% oxygen-loading starts to decompose at notably
higher temperatures (ca. 4000 K), as opposed to the epoxy-
dated graphene (ca. 2400 K). Yet, this doping reduces the avail-
ability of electron density on oxygen functionalities and drasti-
cally changes the electronic and mechanical structures of gra-
phene.88 Besides, we also notice a remarkable drop in stability
with increasing oxygen loads,i.e. “double-sided” doping (50%
loading) would cause decomposition to begin at lower temp-
eratures, around 2700 K.
All in all, current thermal stability analysis reveals that the
GO model with ordered epoxy groups (see Fig. 6a and b for
single- and double-sided versions) is the most stable one in
view of the self-dissociation temperature at which the first
surface groups are liberated. In this connection, this model is
expected to endure the typical ALD temperatures. Considering
also the previous SRPES measurements and the fact that gra-
phene functionalization was performed on a Cu subtrate,22,23
the single-sided epoxy model (Fig. 6a) would be the most
representative one for investigating the surface reactions
during the ALD of Pt/PtOx on GO.
D2. MeCpPtMe3 and Pt(acac)2 binding on graphene oxide.
In order to inspect the reactivity of GO towards Pt precursors,
we computed the adsorption energies of MeCpPtMe 3 and
Pt(acac)2 on the most representative GO model (Fig. 6a) along
with several others (Fig. 6b–h). The corresponding physisorp-
tion and chemisorption energies are listed in Table 3 along-
side the chemical pathways (from eqn (3)–(5)) that lead to
these chemisorbed species. Most relevant lowest-energy physi-
sorbed and chemisorbed species are visualized in Fig. 7,
whereas the visuals of all other relevant species can be found
in Fig. S4.†
Analysing the physisorption energies (ΔEp values, Table 3),
we primarily take note of the stronger physisorption of both Pt
precursors on epoxy groups (except the epoxy-doped case) than
on bare graphene. The latter eﬀect is somewhat more promi-
nent for MeCpPtMe 3 than for Pt(acac) 2. In contrast, the
hydroxyl groups cause a weaker physical binding for both pre-
cursors, which can be attributed to the unfavourable van der
Waals interactions between the hydrogen atoms on the surface
and the given precursor. Accordingly, the mixture of both
surface group types (epoxy and hydroxyl) gives an intermediate
physisorption strength for both precursor types. Moreover, the
doping of the epoxy groups into the graphene lattice remarkably
reduces the physisorption eﬃciency for both precursor types.
In contrast, the functionalization of both graphene sides
rather than only one side has a less systematic influence on
the physisorption energies, determined by the precursor and
surface group types. In detail, for epoxydated GO, a double-
sided model leads to remarkably stabilized physisorbed
species in comparison with their single-sided counterparts
Paper Nanoscale
19838 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

(−3.81 eV vs. −1.55 eV for MeCpPtMe3 and −4.18 eV vs. −1.96
eV for Pt(acac)2). This enhancement might be attributed to the
increased flexibility of the graphene backbone (see Fig. S4a
and b†), as a consequence of the higher ratio of sp 3-type
carbons to sp2 ones (when moving from 25% to 50% oxygen
coverage). As opposed to the epoxy case, for hydroxylated GO,
double-sided functionalization does not have a notable eﬀect
on the physisorption energies. The latter is in line with the
less buckled graphene basal plane following the physisorption
(see Fig. S4c and d†). The more rigid backbone of hydroxylated
graphene can simply be explained by the preservation of the
sp2 to sp3 carbon ratio, as each hydroxyl (–OH) group can only
convert a single carbon atom as opposed to two carbons being
converted by each epoxy (–C–O–C–) group.
In terms of dissociative precursor binding, we note the
overall stronger adsorption for both precursors on graphene
with epoxy or hydroxyl functionalities (and their mixtures)
than on pristine graphene (see Table 3). Specifically for the
more likely case of single-sided functionalization, we take
notice of the soared chemisorption energies for MeCpPtMe3
on both functionality types and their mixtures, while epoxy
groups show higher aﬃnity than hydroxyl (−4.24 vs. −3.50 eV).
The predicted total reaction energies associated with convert-
ing the physisorbed species into chemisorbed ones reveal the
energetically downhill pathways (ΔEr = −2.69 and −3.04 eV,
respectively). Likewise, the computed minimum-energy paths
(Fig. 8) reveal that either pathway requires a rather low barrier
to proceed (0.24 eV and 0.42 eV, respectively). In addition,
adsorption on a mixed GO surface is expected to result in also
good chemisorption of MeCpPtMe 3 like its only-epoxy and
only-hydroxyl counterparts, identified by a highly exothermic
reaction (ΔEc = −4.15 eV and ΔEr = −3.65 eV) with a low
barrier (0.15 eV, Fig. S5 †). Taken together, these findings
suggest that similar to graphene with oxygenated GB, the dis-
sociative binding of MeCpPtMe3 on graphene oxide is thermo-
dynamically as well as kinetically favoured, regardless of the
surface composition, e.g. epoxydated, hydroxylated or a
mixture. The latter point endorses the potential of GO for
nucleating Pt ALD utilizing the MeCpPtMe 3 precursor. It
should also be noted here that a method that enables uniform
distribution of oxygen functionalities on graphene, like O 2
plasma treatment, would be the key for continuous Pt loading
on graphene rather than the type of the predominant surface
oxide groups.
Binding on two diﬀerent GO surfaces employs two distinct
pathways (eqn (4a) and (4d) and Fig. 7a and b), which involve
either a methyl transfer or release of a gaseous methane by-
product. A mixture model combining both functionality types
could employ either one of these pathways, depending on the
actual composition/decoration of the surface. Pertinently, we
have already shown earlier that these specific mechanisms are
also employed for the similar surfaces of graphene with epoxy-
dated or hydroxylated grain boundaries (see section 3, B). This
highlights the role of surface functionalities in determining
the operative reaction pathways. On the other hand, oxyge-
nated graphenes (GBs or GOs) resemble the standard oxide
substrates commonly used for ALD of metals/oxides, e.g.
Al2O3, SiO2, etc. Accordingly, the experimental mechanistic
studies concerning them are also to a certain extent relevant
for graphene. In more detail, IR spectroscopy and X-Ray
absorption measurements evinced the release of one methyl
group on average per precursor molecule during the Pt pre-
cursor dose.49 This renders MeCpPtMe2 a dominant chemisorbed
species that is thermally stable as was observed to decompose
only after long N2 purging at 300 °C.53 Besides, it was shown
by mass spectroscopy that methane (CH4) is produced during
the MeCpPtMe3 pulse, concurrent with the combustion pro-
ducts (H2O and CO2) due to the oxygens residing on the
surface.50,89 Similarly, methane production was also
measured during the precursor exposure on the oxidized
carbon support, where the hydrogen source is the surface
hydroxyl groups.55 Taken together, these experimental findings
endorse both methyl transfer and methane formation mecha-
nisms on oxide surfaces as also predicted by DFT calculations,
without clear distinction between the two (unlike the DFT
calculations).
Concerning the dissociative binding of Pt(acac)2, our DFT
calculations show a clear preference for the hydroxylated
Table 3 Computed physisorption (ΔEp), chemisorption (ΔEc) and reaction (ΔEc) energies [in eV] of MeCpPtMe3 and Pt(acac)2 on various functiona-
lized graphenes. ΔEc values are only reported for the lowest-energy chemisorbed species, as identiﬁed by “Type” (see eqn (3)– (5) for deﬁnitions).
Coverage is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of oxygen adatoms to the carbon atoms on graphene
MeCpPtMe3 Pt(acac)2
System Coverage ΔEp ΔEc ΔEr Type ΔEp ΔEc ΔEr Type
Pristine graphene (PG) 0% −0.56 −0.20 0.36 3a −1.15 2.65 3.80 5a
Graphene oxide (GO)
GO – epoxy (single-sided) 25% −1.55 −4.24 −2.69 4a −1.96 −0.48 1.48 5a
GO – epoxy (doped, single-sided) 25% −0.45 0.16 a 0.61 4a −1.10 1.61 2.71 5a
GO – epoxy (double-sided) 50% −3.81 −3.42 0.39 3a −4.18 −2.00 2.18 5a
GO – hydroxyl 25% −0.46 −3.50 −3.04 4d −0.86 −4.38 −3.52 5b
GO – hydroxyl (double sided) 50% −0.41 0.10 0.51 4d −0.96 −0.23 0.73 5b
GO – random mixture (epoxy + hydroxyl + hydrogen groups) 33% −0.50 −4.15 −3.65 4a −1.24 −1.48 −0.24 5b
a No suitable product,i.e. Pt is not bound to graphene.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19839
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

surface over the epoxydated one (ΔEc = −4.38 vs. −0.48 eV).
The latter finding is a result of the composition of the perti-
nent chemisorbed products (Fig. 7a and b). In more detail, on
the epoxydated surface, one of the acac ligands leaves the pre-
cursor as an anionic by-product (acac−), with no tendency to
stay bonded to the graphene surface (as predicted for the case
of bare graphene). Due to the resulting unstable charge-separ-
ated subunits, the chemisorbed species is notably higher in
energy with respect to the strongly stabilized physisorbed
species (ΔEp = −1.96 eVvs. ΔEc = −0.48 eV), if not as high as in
the case of bare graphene (2.65 eV). Alongside its high
endothermicity (ΔEr = 1.48 eV), the very high accompanying
barriers (4.46 eV) render Pt(acac)2 chemisorption on epoxy-
dated GO highly unfeasible. In contrast, the hydroxylated
surface can provide the precursor with excess hydrogens to
yield the gaseous Hacac by-products, stabilizing the resulting
chemisorbed products. In addition to the latter, platinum can
take with ease a neighbouring, weakly-chemisorbed –OH
Fig. 7 Ball-and-stick representation of the lowest-energy (left) physi-
sorbed and (right) chemisorbed species of (top) MeCpPtMe 3 and
(bottom) Pt(acac)2 on selected graphene oxide models investigated in
the current DFT calculations. Relative energies with respect to the sep-
arated species are given in brackets. Colour code, C: brown; O: red; H:
pink-white; Pt: grey. Hydrogen bonds are represented by black dashed
lines.
Fig. 8 PBE-D3 level minimum energy paths corresponding to the
diﬀerent reaction pathways for MeCpPtMe3 binding on (a) epoxydated
and (b) hydroxylated graphene oxide. First and last points on the reac-
tion coordinate correspond to the physisorbed and chemisorbed
species, respectively. Physisorbed species of (a) and (b) are−1.55 eV and
−0.46 eV with respect to the separated species (MeCpPtMe3 and GO-
epoxy or GO-hydroxy). Activation energy for (b) is computed with
respect to the lowest-energy minimum along the pathway (around 7 Å).
Paper Nanoscale
19840 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

group away from the surface, which further reduces the
energy of the chemisorbed species (see Fig. 7b). Yet more
interestingly, the computed MEP (Fig. 9) reveals that a
very stable intermediate species is formed (ΔE = −7.21 eV)
through abstraction of two adjacent–OH groups by platinum.
This finding suggests that chemisorption of Pt(acac) 2 on
hydroxylated GO is notably hindered by this stable inter-
mediate in which Pt does not remain bonded to the
graphene surface, rendering it unsuitable for proper Pt nuclea-
tion. The latter also applies to the mixture model that
comprises hydroxyl groups along with epoxys and hydrogens.
All in all, current DFT energetics evidence against the practical
use of Pt(acac)2 for Pt deposition on any type of graphene
oxide.
Another point to note here is the detrimental e ﬀect of
doping on binding energies. As can be seen in Table 3, doping
of the epoxy groups into the graphene lattice impedes the
chemisorption eﬃciency of both precursor types, due to their phy-
sisorption. This adverse eﬀect can be attributed to the reduced
availability of free electrons on a doped oxygen as opposed to its
epoxy counterpart, wherein the epoxy-bridge can readily open up
to provide additional charge density. This, in turn, impairs doped
oxygen’s ability to bind platinum eﬃciently. Similarly to the
doping case, the unlikely case, where both sides of graphene are
functionalized, brings about an overall destabilization of the che-
misorbed species (as opposed to the physisorbed species) and con-
current increase in the reaction energies needed for the dissocia-
tive binding of both precursor types on both surface types.
E. Experimental results– Pt ALD on pristine graphene and
graphene oxide
To validate the theoretical findings, Pt ALD was performed on
pristine graphene and graphene treated with an O2 plasma.
Since MeCpPtMe3 shows the most promise for uniform Pt ALD
on graphene in the calculations presented above, this pre-
cursor was selected to test the nucleation of Pt ALD on gra-
phene and graphene oxide. Graphene oxide was created by
exposing pristine graphene samples on 90 nm SiO2/Si (100) to
O2 plasma. The created surface groups were studied by XPS.
Fig. 10a shows the C 1s spectra of a pristine graphene sample
and a sample exposed to 5 min O2 plasma. For pristine gra-
phene the main contribution comes from the sp2 bonding of
the carbon atoms at 284.4 eV. Besides, a small amount of C–O
bonding is present (286.4 eV), indicating the presence of
epoxide (C–O–C) or hydroxide (C–OH) groups on the graphene
surface, most likely present at the grain boundaries of the gra-
phene.21,78 The two plasmon features observed at 290.4 eV and
293.2 eV are the result of interactions of the photoelectron
with free electrons present in the graphene.90 After the O2
plasma treatment, part of the sp2 bonds is converted to sp3
bonds (284.6 eV), indicating that the creation of C–O and CvO
bonds on the graphene indeed leads to the buckling of the gra-
phene. The created surface groups contain both C–O (286.4
eV) and CvO (289.0 eV) showing that a mixture of epoxide,
hydroxide and carbonyl groups is created on the graphene
during the O2 plasma exposure. The observed CvOt oC –O
ratio is higher than that reported by others who have also used
an O2 plasma to functionalize graphene. 22 The diﬀerence
might be caused by a diﬀerence in the plasma parameters and
plasma exposure time, where a longer exposure results in a
higher amount of CvO bonds being created. Nevertheless, GO
is predicted to show high binding aﬃnities for MeCpPtMe3
regardless of which surface group is more dominantly present
(see section D), rendering such diﬀerences irrelevant for ALD
nucleation eﬃciency.
After functionalization, 500 cycles of Pt ALD were per-
formed on oxygenated graphene samples, and a pristine gra-
phene sample was added as a reference. The results are shown
in Fig. 10b–f. On the pristine graphene hardly any Pt depo-
sition occurs. Lines of Pt are visible, located on the grain
boundaries of the graphene, confirming the enhanced reactiv-
ity of grain boundaries and defect sites towards MeCpPtMe3
adsorption.7 Exposing the graphene to an O2 plasma increases
Fig. 9 PBE-D3 level minimum energy paths corresponding to the
diﬀerent reaction pathways for Pt(acac)2 binding on (a) epoxydated and
(b) hydroxylated graphene oxide. First and last points on the reaction
coordinate correspond to the physisorbed and chemisorbed species,
respectively. Physisorbed species of (a) and (b) are−1.96 eV and−0.86
eV with respect to the separated species (Pt(acac)2 and GO-epoxy or
GO-hydroxyl).
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19841
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

the amount of Pt deposited on the graphene. After 1 min O2
plasma, small Pt particles are visible all over the graphene
surface. Increasing the plasma exposure time results in more
functional groups on the graphene surface and increases the
coverage further after 500 Pt ALD cycles. A highly closed layer
is obtained for the sample treated with 5 min O2 plasma,
showing that it is indeed the creation of epoxide, hydroxide
and carbonyl groups that enhances the nucleation. Only gra-
phene wrinkles (folds in the graphene) are more diﬃcult to
cover with Pt (darker lines in the SEM images), and remain
partially uncovered even after a 5 min O2 plasma treatment. It
could be noted that with O2 plasma it is more diﬃcult to create
functional groups on the graphene wrinkles; therefore the
nucleation on these wrinkles is reduced. This could be related
to the masking eﬀect of the PMMA lingering from the graphene
transfer,91 gathered on the wrinkles (and ripples) due to their
enhanced reactivity.92,93 As is evident from Fig. 10, with longer
O2 plasma treatments, PMMA can be completely replaced with
surface oxygens and these wrinkles become finally covered with
platinum. Likewise, a longer Pt deposition (i.e. 1000 ALD cycles)
yields a complete film closure on the 5 min O2 plasma treated
sample, as evinced by the SEM images (Fig. S7†).
4. Conclusions
We present here a detailed molecular-level analysis of the
surface reactions that possibly take place during the
dissociative binding of the ALD precursors, MeCpPtMe3
and Pt(acac)2, for Pt/PtOx deposition on diﬀerent graphene
Fig. 10 (a) XPS C 1s spectrum of pristine and graphene treated with 5 min O2 plasma; (b– f) SEM images showing the Pt coverage after 500 ALD
cycles using MeCpPtMe3 as the Pt precursor on (b) pristine graphene and graphene treated with (c) 1 min, (d) 2 min, (e) 3 min and (f) 5 min O2 plasma.
Fig. 11 Schematic overview of the most feasible chemisorption mechanisms for (top) MeCpPtMe3 and (bottom) Pt(acac)2 on various bare and func-
tionalized graphene surfaces based on the PBE-D3 level calculations.
Paper Nanoscale
19842 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

surfaces, i.e. bare, epoxydated and hydroxylated. On the
grounds of our ab initio DFT calculations regarding the
initial precursor binding step (i.e. ALD nucleation), we give a
schematic overview of the primary and side products yielded
by the most viable chemisorption pathways in Fig. 11. As
also evident from this schematic, the employed reaction
mechanism clearly depends on (a) the available surface
groups on graphene, and (b) the ligands accompanying the
metal centre. Current DFT results also demonstrate the
enhanced reactivity of graphene oxide towards MeCpPtMe3,
as opposed to Pt(acac)2, irrespective of the surface decora-
tion and composition. This is expected to facilitate uniform
ALD nucleation on a wafer-scale. Endorsing the compu-
tational findings, we have experimentally evinced that large-
area, continuous, uniform and high quality ultra-thin films
of Pt/PtOx can be grown on graphene oxide that acts as a
potent ALD seeding layer. For attaining the latter, we per-
formed a mild O 2 plasma treatment to obtain single-layer
graphene oxide on which Pt was deposited with high cover-
age using MeCpPtMe3 and O2 gas. The method presented
here is key in enabling the integration of continuous
and conformal ultrathin Pt films with graphene that is
becoming ever more important in view of the relevant indus-
trial nanocatalyst applications, e.g. in fuel cells, hydrogen
technologies and microreactors. Likewise, the atomistic
insights presented here form a knowledge basis that will aid
the mechanistic understanding of the surface reactions
underlying a variety of analogous ALD processes on diverse
graphene surfaces.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank C. O. van Bommel,
J. J. L. M. Meulendijks & J. J. A. Zeebregts for technical assist-
ance. This work is part of the research program
(Projektruimte: 12PR3101) of the Foundation for Fundamental
Research on Matter (FOM), which is part of the Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO).
Notes and references
1 R. W. Johnson, A. Hultqvist and S. F. Bent,Mater. Today,
2014, 17, 236–246.
2 H. C. M. Knoops, S. E. Potts, A. A. Bol and
W. M. M. Kessels, inHandbook of Crystal Growth: Thin Films
and Epitaxy, ed. T. F. Kuech, Elsevier B.V., Oxford, U.K.,
2014, vol. 3, pp. 1101–1134.
3 A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Falko, K. S. Novoselov,
S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. Koppens, V. Palermo,
N. Pugno, J. A. Garrido, R. Sordan, A. Bianco, L. Ballerini,
M. Prato, E. Lidorikis, J. Kivioja, C. Marinelli, T. Ryhänen,
A. Morpurgo, J. N. Coleman, V. Nicolosi, L. Colombo,
A. Fert, M. Garcia-Hernandez, A. Bachtold, G. F. Schneider,
F. Guinea, C. Dekker, M. Barbone, C. Galiotis,
A. Grigorenko, G. Konstantatos, A. Kis, M. Katsnelson,
C. W. J. Beenakker, L. Vandersypen, A. Loiseau, V. Morandi,
D. Neumaier, E. Treossi, V. Pellegrini, M. Polini,
A. Tredicucci, G. M. Williams, B. H. Hong, J. H. Ahn,
J. M. Kim, H. Zirath, B. J. van Wees, H. van der Zant,
L. Occhipinti, A. Di Matteo, I. A. Kinloch, T. Seyller,
E. Quesnel, X. Feng, K. Teo, N. Rupesinghe, P. Hakonen,
S. R. T. Neil, Q. Tannock, T. Löfwander and J. Kinaret,
Nanoscale, 2014,7, 4598–4810.
4 M. Liu, R. Zhang and W. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114,
5117–5160.
5 K. Cheng, D. He, T. Peng, H. Lv, M. Pan and S. Mu,
Electrochim. Acta, 2014,132, 356–363.
6 C. Wang, L. Ma, L. Liao, S. Bai, R. Long, M. Zuo and
Y. Xiong,Sci. Rep., 2013,3, 2580.
7 K. Kim, H.-B.-R. Lee, R. W. Johnson, J. T. Tanskanen,
N. Liu, M.-G. Kim, C. Pang, C. Ahn, S. F. Bent and Z. Bao,
Nat. Commun., 2014,5,1 –9.
8 G. D. Wilk, R. M. Wallace and J. M. Anthony,J. Appl. Phys.,
2001, 89, 5243.
9 J. A. Robinson, M. Labella, M. Zhu, M. Hollander,
R. Kasarda, Z. Hughes, K. Trumbull, R. Cavalero and
D. Snyder,Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011,98, 053103.
10 F. Xia, V. Perebeinos, Y. Lin, Y. Wu and P. Avouris,Nat.
Nanotechnol., 2011,6, 179–184.
11 T. Aaltonen, M. Ritala, T. Sajavaara, J. Keinonen and
M. Leskelä,Chem. Mater., 2003,15, 1924–1928.
12 H. C. M. Knoops, A. J. M. Mackus, M. E. Donders,
M. C. M. van de Sanden, P. H. L. Notten and
W. M. M. Kessels,Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009,12,G 3 4 .
13 H. B. R. Lee, K. L. Pickrahn and S. F. Bent,J. Phys. Chem. C,
2014, 118, 12325–12332.
14 I. J. M. Erkens, M. A. Verheijen, H. C. M. Knoops,
T. F. Landaluce, F. Roozeboom and W. M. M. Kessels,
Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2014,20, 258–268.
15 A. J. M. Mackus, D. Garcia-Alonso, H. C. M. Knoops,
A. A. Bol and W. M. M. Kessels,Chem. Mater., 2013, 25,
1769–1774.
16 J. Hämäläinen, F. Munnik, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä,Chem.
Mater., 2008,20, 6840–6846.
17 L. Liao and X. Duan,Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010,70, 354–370.
18 X. Wang, S. Tabakman and H. Dai,J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008,
130, 8152–8153.
19 I.-K. Oh, J. Tanskanen, H. Jung, K. Kim, M. J. Lee, Z. Lee,
S.-K. Lee, J.-H. Ahn, C. W. Lee, K. Kim, H. Kim and H.-B.-
R. Lee,Chem. Mater., 2015,27, 5868–5877.
20 V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra,
N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. Hobza, R. Zboril and K. S. Kim,
Chem. Rev., 2012,112, 6156–6214.
21 A. Criado, M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan and M. Prato,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,54, 10734–10750.
22 A. Nourbakhsh, C. Adelmann, Y. Song, C. S. Lee,
I. Asselberghs, C. Huyghebaert, S. Brizzi, M. Tallarida,
D. Schmeißer, S. Van Elshocht, M. Heyns, J. Kong,
T. Palacios and S. De Gendt,Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10781–
10789.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19843
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

23 W. C. Shin, J. H. Bong, S.-Y. Choi and B. J. Cho,ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces, 2013,5, 11515–11519.
24 C. Hsieh, W. Y. Te Chen, D. Y. Tzou, A. K. Roy and
H. T. Hsiao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy , 2012, 37, 17837–
17843.
25 S. D. Elliott,Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2012,27, 074008.
26 L. Huang and B. Han,Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16,
18501–18512.
27 A. S. Sandupatla, K. Alexopoulos, M.-F. Reyniers and
G. B. Marin,J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015,119, 18380–18388.
28 P. E. Blöchl,Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994,50, 17953–
17979.
29 G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 1758–
1775.
30 G. Kresse and J. Hafner,Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993,
47, 558–561.
31 G. Kresse and J. Hafner,Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994,
49, 14251–14269.
32 G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller,Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6,
15–50.
33 G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 11169–
11186.
34 P. Hohenberg,Phys. Rev., 1964,136, B864–B871.
35 W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–
A1138.
36 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof,Phys. Rev. Lett.,
1996, 77, 3865–3868.
37 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof,Phys. Rev. Lett.,
1997, 78, 1396–1396.
38 S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem.
Phys., 2010,132, 154104.
39 J. Björk, F. Hanke, C.-A. Palma, P. Samori, M. Cecchini and
M. Persson,J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010,1, 3407–3412.
40 S. Grimme, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2011,
1, 211–228.
41 X. Hu, J. Schuster, S. E. Schulz and T. Gessner,
Microelectron. Eng., 2015,137,2 3–31.
42 G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson,J. Chem.
Phys., 2000,113, 9901.
43 J. Nocedal,Math. Comput., 1980,35, 773–773.
44 E. Bitzek, P. Koskinen, F. Gähler, M. Moseler and
P. Gumbsch,Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006,97,1 –4.
45 VTST tool set for V ASP http://theory.cm.utexas.edu/vasp/
(accessed Oct 16, 2015).
46 W. Tang, E. Sanville and G. Henkelman,J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter, 2009,21, 084204.
47 H. Yan, F. Xia, W. Zhu, M. Freitag, C. Dimitrakopoulos,
A. A. Bol, G. Tulevski and P. Avouris,ACS Nano, 2011, 5,
9854–9860.
48 S. M. Geyer, R. Methaapanon, B. Shong, P. A. Pianetta and
S. F. Bent,J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012,4, 176–179.
49 W. M. M. Kessels, H. C. M. Knoops, S. A. F. Dielissen,
A. J. M. MacKus and M. C. M. van De Sanden,Appl. Phys.
Lett., 2009,95,1 3–16.
50 I. J. M. Erkens, A. J. M. Mackus, H. C. M. Knoops,
P. Smits, T. H. M. van de Ven, F. Roozeboom and
W. M. M. Kessels,ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2012, 1,
P255–P262.
51 A. J. M. Mackus, N. Leick, L. Baker and W. M. M. Kessels,
Chem. Mater., 2012,24, 1752–1761.
52 T. Aaltonen, A. Rahtu, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä,
Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003,6, C130.
53 W. Setthapun, W. D. Williams, S. M. Kim, H. Feng,
J. W. Elam, F. A. Rabuﬀetti, K. R. Poeppelmeier, P. C. Stair,
E. A. Stach, F. H. Ribeiro, J. T. Miller and C. L. Marshall,
J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010,114, 9758–9771.
54 M. Utriainen, M. Kröger-Laukkanen, L. S. Johansson and
L. Niinistö,Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000,157, 151–158.
55 A. M. Lubers, C. L. Muhich, K. M. Anderson and
A. W. Weimer,J. Nanopart. Res., 2015,17, 179.
56 M. Shirazi and S. D. Elliott, J. Comput. Chem., 2014, 35,
244–259.
57 M. Shirazi and S. D. Elliott,Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 878–
889.
58 J. Hämäläinen, E. Puukilainen, T. Sajavaara, M. Ritala and
M. Leskelä,Thin Solid Films, 2013,531, 243–250.
59 Q. Ma and F. Zaera, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A , 2013, 31,
01A112.
60 P. a. Denis and F. Iribarne,J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117,
19048–19055.
61 L. P. Biró and P. Lambin,New J. Phys., 2013,15, 035024.
62 O. V. Yazyev and S. G. Louie,Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter,
2010, 81,1 –7.
63 J. Lahiri, Y. Lin, P. Bozkurt, I. I. Oleynik and M. Batzill,Nat.
Nanotechnol., 2010,5, 326–329.
64 W. H. Brito, R. Kagimura and R. H. Miwa,Appl. Phys. Lett.,
2011, 98, 213107.
65 B. Wang, Y. S. Puzyrev and S. T. Pantelides, Polyhedron,
2013, 64, 158–162.
66 P. Nemes-Incze, K. J. Yoo, L. Tapasztó, G. Dobrik, J. Lábár,
Z. E. Horvth, C. Hwang and L. P. Biró,Appl. Phys. Lett.,
2011, 99, 23104.
67 X. Feng, S. Maier and M. Salmeron,J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012,
134, 5662–5668.
68 L. Zhang, D. A. Pejaković, B. Geng and J. Marschall,Appl.
Surf. Sci., 2011,257, 5647–5656.
69 A. M. van der Zande, P. Y. Huang, D. A. Chenet,
T. C. Berkelbach, Y. You, G.-H. Lee, T. F. Heinz,
D. R. Reichman, D. a. Muller and J. C. Hone,Nat. Mater.,
2013, 12, 554–561.
70 D. L. Duong, G. H. Han, S. M. Lee, F. Gunes,
E. S. Kim, S. T. Kim, H. Kim, Q. H. Ta, K. P. So,
S. J. Yoon, S. H. S. J. S. H. S. J. Chae, Y. W. Jo, M. H. Park,
S. H. S. J. S. H. S. J. Chae, S. C. Lim, J. Y. Choi and
Y. H. Lee,Nature, 2012,490, 235–239.
71 R. Yang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, D. Shi, H. Gao,
E. Wang and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater. , 2010, 22, 4014 –
4019.
72 J. I. Paredes, A. Martinez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascon,
J. Mater. Chem., 2000,10, 1585–1591.
73 S. Huh, J. Park, Y. S. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. H. Hong and
J. M. Nam,ACS Nano, 2011,5, 9799–9806.
Paper Nanoscale
19844 | Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online

74 F. Güneş, G. H. Han, H.-J. Shin, S. Y. Lee, M. Jin,
D. L. Duong, S. J. Chae, E. S. Kim, F. Yao, A. Benayad,
J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee,Nano, 2011,6, 409–418.
75 D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov,
P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov,
M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov,Science,
2009, 323, 610–613.
76 H. Sahin, O. Leenaerts, S. K. Singh and F. M. Peeters,Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2015,5, 255–272.
77 J.-A. Yan, L. Xian and M. Y. Chou,Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009,
103, 086802.
78 D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoﬀ,
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010,39, 228–240.
79 A. M. Dimiev, L. B. Alemany and J. M. Tour,ACS Nano,
2013, 7, 576–588.
80 S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas,
A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and
R. S. Ruoﬀ, Carbon, 2007,45, 1558–1565.
81 G. Lee, J. Kim, K. Kim and J. W. Han,J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A,
2015, 33, 060602.
82 M. Hirata, T. Gotou, S. Horiuchi, M. Fujiwara and M. Ohba,
Carbon, 2004,42, 2929–2937.
83 K. A. Mkhoyan, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart,
G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. Miller and M. Chhowalla,Nano Lett.,
2009, 9, 1058–1063.
84 J.-L. Li, K. N. Kudin, M. J. McAllister, R. K. Prud’homme,
I. A. Aksay and R. Car,Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006,96, 176101.
85 A. Bagri, C. Mattevi, M. Acik, Y. J. Chabal, M. Chhowalla
and V. B. Shenoy,Nat. Chem., 2010,2, 581–587.
86 I. Jung, D. A. Field, N. J. Clark, Y. W. Zhu, D. X. Yang,
R. D. Piner, S. Stankovich, D. a. Dikin, H. Geisler,
C. a. Ventrice and R. S. Ruoﬀ, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113,
18480–18486.
87 N. Ghaderi and M. Peressi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114,
21625–21630.
88 N. Leconte, J. Moser, P. Ordejón, H. Tao, A. Lherbier,
A. Bachtold, F. Alsina, C. M. Sotomayor Torres,
J.-C. Charlier and S. Roche,ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4033–
4038.
89 S. T. Christensen and J. W. Elam,Chem. Mater., 2010, 22,
2517–2525.
90 C 1s XPS http://xpssimplified.com/elements/carbon.php
(accessed Jul 7, 2016).
91 E. Färm, M. Kemell, M. Ritala and M. Leskela, J. Phys.
Chem., 2008,112, 15791–15795.
92 G. Fisichella, S. DiFranco, F. Roccaforte, S. Ravesi and
F. Giannazzo,Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014,104, 233105.
93 W. J. Zhu, T. Low, V. Perebeinos, A. A. Bol, Y. Zhu,
H. G. Yan, J. Tersoﬀ and P. Avouris,Nano Lett., 2012, 12,
3431–3436.
Nanoscale Paper
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016 Nanoscale,2 0 1 6 ,8,1 9 8 2 9–19845 | 19845
Published on 08 November 2016. Downloaded by Leibniz Universitat Hannover on 12/6/2024 12:58:56 PM. 
View Article Online