Research paper
Optimal design of novel precursor materials for the atomic layer
deposition using computer-aided molecular design
Mina Shahmohammadia,1, Rajib Mukherjeeb,c,1, Christos G. Takoudisa,d,⇑, Urmila M. Diwekarb,d,⇑
a Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, United States
b Vishwamitra Research Institute, Crystal Lake, IL 60012, United States
c Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas Permian Basin, Odessa, TX 79762, United States
d Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, United States
highlights
/C15 Derived a group contribution method for Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD).
/C15 Computed UNIFAC interaction parameters for functional groups of ALD precursors.
/C15 Developed computer-aided molecular design along with ALD.
/C15 Used UNIFAC interaction parameters of functional groups to design new precursors.
/C15 Designed novel titanium precursors for ALD with enhanced properties.
article info
Article history:
Received 8 September 2020
Received in revised form 21 December 2020
Accepted 24 December 2020
Available online 5 January 2021
Keywords:
Atomic layer deposition
Group contribution method
Computer-aided molecular design
Adsorbate solid solution theory
Efﬁcient ant colony optimization
abstract
Nanomaterials and nanostructures with multi-functional properties found widespread applications such
as electronics, optics, and coatings that can be fabricated using Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD). ALD is a
vapor phase deposition technique to generate thin ﬁlms of metals and metal oxides on a substrate. In this
process, a precursor, which often comprises of organic functional groups that surround the depositing
metal, chemisorbs on the substrate or reacts with the surface sites and with each other. Precursor
chemisorption on the substrate leads ALD to be a self-limiting process. Thus, the precursor(s) should
be chosen in a way to enhance deposition based on the ALD conditions. For a given application, it is prac-
tically impossible to carry out a large number of experiments using numerous precursors with varied
deposition conditions to ﬁnd the one that maximizes the growth rate in ALD. In addition, only existing
precursors can be tested experimentally. The overall objective of this work is to develop a computational
tool for thein-silico design of precursor materials using adsorbate solid solution theory (ASST). In the ﬁrst
part of this paper, we apply the ASST to derive properties of the functional groups present in the precur-
sor using a new Group Contribution Method (GCM). The GCM is successfully derived and compared with
the experimental data from ALD. The method shows good agreement and is useful for the design of novel
materials. In the second part of this paper, using the thermodynamic properties as obtained from GCM,
we develop a computer-aided molecular design (CAMD) framework for the optimal design of novel pre-
cursor materials with enhanced deposition properties for the ALD of metal oxides and metals. The meta-
heuristic efﬁcient ant colony optimization algorithm (EACO) developed in-house is used for both parts.
CAMD is a combinatorial optimization methodology, where molecules with optimal desired properties
are generated from functional groups. The precursor selection optimization problem is posed as a mixed
integer nonlinear programming problem, which is solved using EACO. The ALD growth kinetics is used as
an objective of optimization and a solution is validated with thermodynamic constraints. Along with the
number of groups, the temperature is also included in the optimization framework as decision variables.
Forty-one novel titanium precursor molecular structures for ALD are generated with growth rates ranging
from 1.23 Å/cycle to as high as 1.65 Å/cycle. Thus, these precursors have shown growth rates higher than
the known titanium precursors. ALD growth rate is found to be a function of the combination of the pre-
cursor functional groups as well as temperature with a complex correlation among them.
/C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2020.116416
0009-2509//C2112021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑ Corresponding authors at: Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, United States.
E-mail addresses:takoudis@uic.edu (C.G. Takoudis),urmila@vri-custom.org (U.M. Diwekar).
1 Authors contributed equally.
Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Chemical Engineering Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ces


1. Introduction
Multifunctional thin-ﬁlm nanomaterials have found wide-
spread applications in different areas such as in electronics, optics,
protective and decorative coatings, and biomedical implants.
Design, development, and implementation of new thin-ﬁlm tech-
nology is often time-consuming, expensive, and heuristic. It took
nearly 15,000-panel trails and two and a half years for U.S. Naval
Air Systems Command (NAVAIR), to come up with an acceptable
alternative to toxic hexavalent chromium (Cr + 6) used in chromate
conversion coating ( Matzdorf et al., 2002 ). High-temperature
dielectric is another area where new material development is
actively pursued to increase the temperature-endurance of capac-
itors used in high-temperature aerospace power electronic sys-
tems for the future generation of nanoelectronics ( Xu et al.,
2012). Many such applications warrant extensive materials search.
No proven theory or method yet exists to help us expedite material
selection/property prediction during this technology development
cycle. It has been realized that simulation-based materials design
has the potential to dramatically reduce the need for expensive
down-stream characterization and testing for these materials.
However, currently, we don’t even have a good grasp of how com-
bining different elements into particular compounds gives them
speciﬁc properties, or how these properties give materials func-
tional qualities.
Nanomaterials and nanostructures with multi-functional prop-
erties and widespread applications can be fabricated using Atomic
Layer Deposition (ALD). ALD is a vapor phase technique in which
the deposition of thin ﬁlms takes place on a substrate. Sequential
and self-limiting surface reactions that happen in the ALD process
create conformal and pinhole-free ﬁlms, which can be precisely
controlled over thickness and composition (Bishal et al., 2015;
George, 2010). The thin ﬁlms produced by ALD have extensive
applications such as in semiconductors (Kim, 2003), optical coat-
ings, solar cells ( M Ritala et al., 1994 ), ferroelectric material
(Chang et al., 2016), high-k transistors, fuel cells (Johnson et al.,
2014), and biomedical applications ( Bishal et al., 2017, 2018;
Shahmohammadi et al., 2020a). A precursor used in this process
has certain desirable qualities, such as being volatile, thermally
stable, and highly reactive. Precursor molecules, which are mostly
a metal surrounded by organic functional groups, chemisorb on the
substrate or react with the surface sites and with each other. Part
Nomenclature
A Area (m 2)
Ag Van der Waals surface area (cm 2/mol)
anm Interaction parameters
c Number
C1 Initial concentration of adsorbate (mol/L)
Eq Total number of equations used to solve the problem
Err Error
GE Gibbs excess free energy (J)
GR Growth rate (nm/cyc)
gad Free energy of immersion of the adsorbed solution (J/kg)
h Thickness (nm)
l Bond distances (Å)
M0 Molecular weight of adsorbent (g/mol)
Ngt Total functional groups
NA Avogadro’s number
n Molar quantity (moles)
P Pressure (Pa)
Pv Vapor pressure (Torr)
q Adsorption capacity (mol/g)
qi Parameter for Vander Waal surface calculation
Q Molar ﬂow rate (mole/s)
Qg Van der Waals group surfaces of group K (m2)
ri Parameter for van der Waal volume calculation
rw Van der Waals radius (Å)
r1;r 2 Van der Waals radii for both atoms (Å)
Rg Van der Waals group volumes of group K (m3)
R Ideal gas constant (8.314 J/mol K)
t Precursor pulse time (s)
T Temperature of adsorption (K)
vp Pore volume of the adsorbent (cm3/g)
voi Molar volume of the respective ﬂuid (cm3/mol)
Vg Van der Waals volume (cm 3/mol)
V Volume (cm 3)
x Molar fraction
Greek letters
c Activity coefﬁcient
c/C3
GE;i Activity coefﬁcient of a binary adsorbate solid solution
u/C3 Chemical potential of the wetted solid (J/g)
u/C3
0i Chemical potential of the wetted solid plus adsorption
of the pure componenti (J/g)
ui Volume fraction for UNIFAC calculation
hi Surface area fraction for UNIFAC calculation
Cs
mi Surface phase capacity of componenti (mol/g)
q Density (g/mL)
Subscripts
i Component i
0 Adsorbent
1 Adsorbate (Ti or Hf)
2, 3, 4 Component 2, 3, or 4
0i Pure componenti or pure adsorbed componenti
cyc In one cycle
ﬁlm In the ﬁlm
gGroup index
j Number of components
ml In each monolayer
T Total
SlnSolution
Superscripts
⁄ Adsorbate solid solution
1 Initial feed
ad Adsorption
b Bulk phase
C Combinatorial
C* Combinatorial in ASS phase
cal Calculated
Cb Combinatorial in bulk phase
cyc Cycle
E* Excess adsorbate solid solution
Es Excess of the surface phase
exp Experimental
ml Monolayer
n Adsorbate solid solution
opt Optimal
R Residual
R* Residual in the ASS phase
Rb Residual in the bulk phase
s Surface phase
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
2

of the molecule subsequently desorbs from the surface after com-
pletion of the reaction. The precursors then proceed to react with
other unreacted surface areas and produce a conformal ﬁlm. Pre-
cursor chemisorption on the substrate saturates, leading to a
self-limiting process and eventually forms ﬁlms with accurate
thickness at Ångström levels ( Aaltonen et al., 2003; Leskelä and
Ritala, 2002). The ALD precursor is usually selected based on few
key physical properties, which is thought to produce thin ﬁlms
with the desired property (e.g., adsorption capacity, dielectric con-
stant, leakage current, gas impermeability, electrical conductivity,
photochemical activity, and antimicrobial activity) (Huang, 2017;
Leskelä and Ritala, 2002; Majumder et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2012).
The structure of the precursor and precursor adsorption are essen-
tial elements of ALD; hence, the optimal design of novel precursor
materials is at the center of this study. In the present work, we gen-
erate novel precursors with enhanced properties for the ALD pro-
cess with the aid of computer-aided molecular design (CAMD).
There are limited theoretical models and not any classical
thermodynamic model available to describe ALD. Puurunen
(Puurunen, 2003a) has derived a model to describe the growth
per cycle in ALD as a function of the chemistry of the growth and
relates the growth per cycle to the size of the reactant and the
chemisorption process involved. Elliot (Elliott, 2005) presented a
theoretical model for the atomic-scale mechanism of a single
ALD process and explained how the process conditions might affect
the growth rate. Gordonet al. (Gordon et al., 2003) developed a
theory to deposit uniform coatings in narrow holes of the arbitrary
cross-section. Moreover, Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) which is a
stochastic based model along with Density Functional Theory
(DFT) have been applied several times to study the mechanism of
ALD or design precursors (Huang et al., 2014; Park et al., 2016;
Xu and Musgrave, 2004). However, there exists no model to predict
the growth rate versus precursor pulse time in order to develop
novel precursors for ALD from molecular structures.
In the present work, a theoretical framework has been devel-
oped to model the growth rate of ALD as a function of precursor
pulse time by applying the Adsorbate Solid Solution Theory (ASST)
(Berti et al., 1999). ASST incorporates the inﬂuence of the func-
tional groups through the Group Contribution Method (GCM)
methodology (Benavides and Diwekar, 2014). In GCM, the thermo-
dynamic properties of a compound are predicted from its molecu-
lar structure. The molecule is split up into structural and functional
groups that can be composed of individual atoms or small groups
of atoms. The GCM parameter of a functional group is estimated
by the number of times a particular group appears in the adsorbent
(solid substrate in ALD) multiplied by its contribution. The parame-
trized GCMs are used for the estimation of binary interaction
parameters between different groups, where there is no available
experimental data and can avoid the need for expensive experi-
mentation for that purpose (Khalifa and Lue, 2017). Estimation of
binary interaction parameter for calculation of activity coefﬁcients
for separation process like distillation requires the use of the
Universal Quasi-chemical Functional-group Activity Coefﬁcient
(UNIFAC) model for GCM to predict the vapor-liquid equilibrium
(Fredenslund, 2012). In ASST, a modiﬁed version of the UNIFAC
model is presented that uses the model to compute the activity
coefﬁcient in the adsorbate solid solution. ASST has been used
effectively for the prediction of adsorption of radioactive elements
as well as arsenic in clay-based adsorbents (Benavides et al., 2015;
Benavides and Diwekar, 2014; Doshi et al., 2018) and metal ions in
polymer resin (Mukherjee et al., 2017). In the present work, an
extended version of ASST is used to predict the chemisorption on
a silicon substrate in ALD. An optimization framework based on
efﬁcient ant colony optimization (EACO) ( Diwekar and
Gebreslassie, 2016; Gebreslassie and Diwekar, 2015) is used to
minimize the difference between predicted and experimental data
in order to obtain the optimal value of the interaction parameter.
CAMD generates molecules with desired properties from func-
tional groups using a technique that is reverse to that of GCM.
While GCM estimates the properties of the molecule based on
the functional groups comprising the molecule, CAMD, on the
other hand combines different functional groups to generate mole-
cules having desired properties (Kim and Diwekar, 2002). CAMD
methods have been applied extensively in various areas such as
extraction solvents (Cheng and Wang, 2008; Gebreslassie and
Diwekar, 2015; Giovanoglou et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2004;
Marcoulaki and Kokossis, 2000; Samudra and Sahinidis, 2013),
polymer designs (Hostrup et al., 1999; Mukherjee et al., 2017),
degreasing solvents (Trevizo et al., 2000), blanket wash solvents
(Chemmangattuvalappil et al., 2009; Sinha and Achenie, 2001),
absorption solvents (Eden et al., 2004; Eljack and Eden, 2008;
Odele and Macchietto, 1993; Pistikopoulos and Stefanis, 1998;
Salazar et al., 2013), refrigerant design (Churi and Achenie, 1996;
Duvedi and Achenie, 1996), distillation solvents (Kim et al., 2004;
Kim and Diwekar, 2002; Xu and Diwekar, 2007, 2005), reaction sol-
vents (Folic et al., 2008; Lin et al., 2005), catalysts (Lin et al., 2005),
value added products (Camarda and Sunderesan, 2005), crystal-
lization solvent (Karunanithi et al., 2006), and foaming agents
(Yamamoto and Tochigi, 2008). CAMD has been used effectively
for the design of novel clay-based adsorbents to adsorb radioactive
elements from ﬂowback/produced water (Benavides et al., 2015)
and remove arsenic from water (Doshi et al., 2018). Mukherjee
et al. (Mukherjee et al., 2017) have used CAMD for the design of
novel polymer resin for metal ion removal from water. However,
this is the ﬁrst time such an approach is going to be applied to opti-
mally design new precursor materials with enhanced properties
for ALD.
In the ﬁrst part of this work, we have used experimental satura-
tion curves from four different ALD systems (Deshpande et al.,
2004; Liu et al., 2005; Selvaraj et al., 2013; Xie et al., 2007)t o
model the chemisorption process during ALD using a modiﬁed ver-
sion of ASST. The thermodynamic properties (i.e., binary interac-
tion parameters between precursor functional groups with each
other and with the substrate) are estimated with UNIFAC GCM.
Then the growth rates were computed using a model equation
derived from ASST, which is, in turn, compared to the experimental
growth rates. It has been shown that one can predict the growth
rate of an ALD system theoretically with this new method, without
requiring expensive experiments. In the second part of this work,
these estimated properties of the functional groups are used to
generate new precursor molecules using CAMD. Gebreslassie and
Diwekar (Gebreslassie and Diwekar, 2015) have used EACO algo-
rithm for CAMD of environmentally benign solvents. Comparison
of their results with different optimization techniques showed
improved solution using EACO that has prompted us to use the
same optimization algorithm. It is practically impossible to synthe-
size numerous precursors and carry out a large number of ALD
experiments with varied deposition conditions in order to ﬁnd
the optimum one with improved properties. CAMD framework is
used to overcome those issues of design and development of pre-
cursor materials without performing expensive and time-
consuming experiments. Based on the properties of the functional
groups that have already been estimated by GCM, CAMD explores
all combinations and generates possible molecules. From the gen-
erated ones, improved molecules are selected based on the pre-
dicted properties by UNIFAC GCM. Since CAMD uses optimization
to enhance the properties, the generated precursor molecules are
the better ones that maximize the growth rate of ALD.
The paper is organized as follows: the next section (Section 2)
gives the problem formulation followed by a theoretical
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
3

background that includes model equations and description of the
optimization problem as used in this work.Section 3gives details
about the case studies used to prove the developed theory followed
by results and discussions from the case studies inSection 4. The
conclusions are given inSection 5.
2. Problem formulation and methodology
2.1. ALD as a chemisorption process
Adsorption is a process in which an atom, ion, or molecule (ad-
sorbate) is separated from a ﬂuid or dissolved solid to adhere to a
surface, called the adsorbent. Adsorption can be physical or chem-
ical, also known as physisorption and chemisorption, respectively.
In each adsorption process, there are two major phases: the bulk
phase and the adsorbed or surface phase. In ALD, the precursor
molecules from the bulk phase are chemisorbed on the substrate
(Puurunen, 2003b), which is the solid phase, and this continues
until the adsorbent reaches its maximum capacity when the sys-
tem reaches adsorption equilibrium. During equilibrium, the
adsorption rate equals the desorption rate, and no more adsorbate
can be adsorbed. An isotherm can describe the adsorption equilib-
rium by plotting the amount of adsorbate adsorbed (q) versus the
concentration of adsorbate in the bulk phase (C). In an isotherm
where the graph begins to show a plateau is the maximum adsorp-
tion capacity. Similarly, in an ALD process, the growth rate forms a
plateau as we increase the precursor pulse time. In this case, after
saturation, further increasing the amount of precursor by increas-
ing the pulse time does not increase the growth rate as the maxi-
mum capacity has been achieved. In the present work, we have
related the growth rate and precursor pulse time to the adsorption
capacity and concentration of the chemisorption process that
occurs in ALD through the enhanced ASST model.
A typical example indicating the effect of precursor pulse time
on growth rate in the ALD process is demonstrated in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 shows the growth rate versus pulse time of TiO2 on Si
(100) substrate using tetrakis (diethylamino) titanium (TDEAT)
as the precursor (Selvaraj et al., 2013). The effect of the precursor
pulse time on the growth rate of ﬁlms indicates that there is no sig-
niﬁcant change in growth rate for precursor pulse times beyond
2 s. That conﬁrms ALD is a self-limiting process. Details about
the experiment are given in the case studies (Section 3).
Fig. 2shows a schematic representation of the adsorption pro-
cess in an ALD reactor. The precursor comprises functional groups
and the metal to be deposited. The precursor compound, along
with inert gas, comprises the initial solution that is pulsed into
the ALD reactor. The substrate acts as an adsorbent. During the
deposition, the functional groups of the precursor and the metal
interact with the substrate. In ASST, contrary to the classical for-
mulation of adsorption equilibrium, the adsorbate phase is consid-
ered as a mixture containing the adsorbate and the adsorbent
(substrate). The Gibbs free energy GE/C3
/C16/C17
of adsorption for the
adsorbate solid solution (ASS) is related to the activity coefﬁcient
of the involved components. The unreacted precursors, along with
the inert gas, comprise the bulk phase. The deposition of Ti using
tetrakis(dimethylamido)titanium (TDMAT) as a precursor is shown
in Fig. 2. In this system, the functional groups of TDMAT and nitro-
gen gas (N2) are shown as an example of the components present
in the initial solution. The bulk phase comprises the unreacted pre-
cursors as well as the purged functional groups of TDMAT from the
substrate along with the N2 gas. The mixture of titanium (Ti) and
silicon (Si) are examples of components in the ASS phase.
Mole balance in ALD
The mole balance equations are used to calculate the number of
moles and mole fractions of each component in different phases, as
mentioned above. Eq.(1) displays the mole balance for each com-
ponent i in an ALD process.
n1
i ¼ n/C3
i þ nb
i 8i ð1Þ
where ni
1, ni*, andni
b are the moles of componenti in the initial solu-
tion entering the reactor, in the ASS phase, and in the bulk phase,
respectively. In Eq.(1), i 2 1; /C1/C1/C1 ; 4½/C138 for the initial composition and
bulk phase (i.e., functional groups of TDMAT comprising the metal
Ti (1), N (2) and CH3 (3), and inert N2 (4)), and i 2 0; 1½/C138 for the
ASS phase, (i.e., Si (0) and Ti (1)).
To calculate the total moles and mole fractions of each compo-
nent in the initial solution, Eqs.(2) and (3)are used:
n1
T ¼
X4
i¼1
n1
i ð2Þ
x1
i ¼ n1
i
n1
T
8i ð3Þ
where xi
1 is the mole fraction of componenti in the initial solution,
similarly, Eqs.(4) and (5)are used to ﬁnd the total moles and mole
fractions in the bulk phase.
nb
T ¼
X4
i¼1
nb
i ð4Þ
xb
i ¼ nb
i
nb
T
8i ð5Þ
And ﬁnally, Eqs.(6) and (7)are used to calculate the total moles
and mole fractions in the ASS phase.
n/C3
T ¼
X1
i¼0
n/C3
i ð6ÞFig. 1. Effect of precursor pulse time on TiO2 ALD growth rate. The vertical error
bars indicate ﬁlm uniformity across the sample (Selvaraj et al., 2013).
Fig. 2. An example of ALD as an adsorption process. ‘‘1” represents the initial
solution, which includes the precursor and inert gas, ‘‘0” represents the substrate,
which is the adsorbent, ‘‘b” is the bulk phase, and ‘‘*” is the ASS phase.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
4

x/C3
i ¼ n/C3
i
n/C3
T
8i ð7Þ
Group contribution method for ALD:
To derive the GCM for ALD, we need to have mole fractions of
the adsorbate in the surface phase and bulk phase, and the adsorp-
tion capacity (mole/g). We start with experimental growth
rate,GRexpð nm
cycleÞ as illustrated inFig. 1. Fig. 1was generated by Sel-
varaj et al. (Selvaraj et al., 2013) by depositing TiO2 using TDEAT
where Si (100) was used as the substrate, and nitrogen as the car-
rier gas. It shows the effect of precursor pulse time on TiO2 ALD
growth rate at 200/C176C substrate temperature. The bubbler temper-
ature was at 65/C176C and the system pressure was 0.5 Torr. To ﬁnd
the number of moles of titanium (nTi) deposited on the substrate
in each cycle, Eqs. (8)–(13) are used:
hfilm ¼ GRexp /C3 ccyc ð8Þ
cfilm
ml ¼ hfilm
hTiO2
ð9Þ
In Eqs. (8) and (9),hﬁlm, ccyc, cml
ﬁlm, andhTiO2, are referring to the
thickness of the ﬁlm (nm), number of cycles, number of monolay-
ers in ﬁlm, and thickness of each TiO2 monolayer (nm), respec-
tively. hTiO2 is calculated based on literature (Puurunen, 2003b,
2003a). For the temperatures we worked on, TiO2 has been consid-
ered amorphous (Deshpande et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2005; Xie et al.,
2007), and its density is 4.23 g/cm3. According to this information,
hTiO2 is estimated to be 0.3 nm. Assuming each TiO2 unit as a cube,
and full monolayer growth, the area each unit would cover (ATiO2),
is 0.3/C2 0.3 nm2. This is a simpliﬁed assumption which is also con-
sistent with other equations found in the literature (Puurunen,
2003b, 2003a). Therefore, the number of TiO2 units in one mono-
layer (cTiO2
ml ) and in the ﬁlm (cTiO2
ﬁlm ) can be found by Eqs.(10) and
(11):
cml
TiO2
¼ ASi
ATiO2
ð10Þ
cfilm
TiO2
¼ cfilm
ml /C3 cml
TiO2
ð11Þ
As each TiO2 unit contains one titanium,cTiO2
ﬁlm is equal tocTi
ﬁlm.
Thus, the number of moles of titanium (mole) deposited in ﬁlm,
(nTi
ﬁlm), and in each cycle, (nTi
cyc), can be calculated by:
nfilm
Ti ¼ cfilm
Ti
NA
ð12Þ
ncyc
Ti ¼ nfilm
Ti
ccyc
ð13Þ
NA in Eq. (12) is Avogadro’s number. The adsorption capacity,
qexp (mole/g) and the mole fractions of titanium in the ASS
phase,x/C3
Ti, can be found by Eqs.14 and 15, respectively. In these
equations, as the area, thickness, and density of the silicon is
known, its mass (g), (msiÞ, can be calculated. Similarly, multiplying
the molecular weight (g/mol) of titanium bynTi
ﬁlm results in its mass
(g) in the ﬁlm, (mfilm
Ti Þ:
qexp ¼ ncyc
Ti
mSi þ mfilm
Ti
ð14Þ
x/C3
Ti ¼ ncyc
Ti
nSi þ nfilm
Ti
ð15Þ
In Eqs. (14) and (15), nTi
cyc is the number of moles of titanium,
which is deposited in one cycle.
The corresponding mole fractions in the bulk phase (precursor),
xb
i can be calculated from the number of moles of Ti remaining in
the bulk phase. The pulse time (s), t and molar ﬂow of gas (mole/
s); Q are used to calculate nb
Ti, from which the mole fraction in
the bulk,xb
i can be calculated as:
nb
Ti ¼ xb
Ti /C3 Q /C3 t /C0 ncyc
Ti ð16Þ
where xb
Ti is the mole fraction of Ti in the gas ﬂow. The amount of
precursor increases linearly with pulse time. Therefore, the mole
fractions in the bulk phase for the precursor molecule (and not
the inert gas) is multiplied by the pulse time as shown in Eq.(16)
above.
To derive the GCM, we apply the ASST for the adsorption for this
problem. The ASST is a thermodynamic framework that describes
the adsorption behavior of a ﬂuid on a solid’s surface. This theory
incorporates the inﬂuence that functional groups in the adsorbent
have on the adsorption process. Using the activity coefﬁcients in
the surface phase (Si surface) and the bulk phase, one may ﬁnd
the relationship between the phase equilibriums of each adsorbed
component in the surface phase and the bulk phase. However,
since we are considering chemisorption, we consider mole frac-
tions of groups instead of components used in traditional UNIFAC
based GCMs. The relation of this phase equilibrium for each com-
ponent (group) is described in Eq. (17), as given in Berti et al.
(Berti et al., 1999). It should be noted that we are presenting the
ASST equation in terms of components as per the original refer-
ence. However, as stated earlier, in our case, we have used groups
in the same way as components.
2.2. Adsorbate-solid solution theory
ASST is a thermodynamic framework introduced by Bertiet al.
(Berti et al., 1999). In ASST, the adsorbed phase is considered as a
solution of solid (a mixture) containing the adsorbed species and
the adsorbent as the additional component. The idea behind this
theory is that the adsorbed phase is a hypothetical mixture of
the adsorbate and the adsorbent (Fig. 3).
In this theory, the activity coefﬁcients of the adsorbed phase can
be calculated using Excess Gibbs free energy models (GE models),
as shown in Eq. (17). Eq. (17) shows the relationship between
the phase equilibrium of componenti in surface and bulk phases
in which the activity coefﬁcient of that component in both phases
has been used:
xb
i cb
i ¼ xs
i cs
iexp gad /C0 gad
0i
RTCs
mi
/C18/C19
ð17Þ
Fig. 3. (a) The total amount of ﬂuid molecules is divided into two independent
phases that are assumed to be homogeneous: the adsorbed or surface phase and the
bulk phase. (b) The adsorbate solid solution is deﬁned as the reference system, and
the bulk phase is considered to be uninﬂuenced by the solid.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
5

where xi
b and xi
s are the mole fractions andci
band ci
sare the activity
coefﬁcient of componenti, in the bulk and surface phase, respec-
tively. gad and g0i
ad are the free energy of immersion in the adsorbed
solution and in the pure adsorbed species, respectively.R is the
ideal gas constant,T is the absolute temperature, andCmi
s is the sur-
face phase capacity of componenti. Cmi
s is calculated by Eq.18:
Cs
mi ¼ vp
v0i
ð18Þ
In which,vp is the pore volume of the adsorbent andv0i is the
molar volume of the ﬂuid.
In the ASST system, we consider the effect of different structural
and functional groups of the adsorbent on the adsorption behavior.
Eq. (19) shows the relation of the phase equilibrium of group com-
ponent i between bulk and Adsorbate Solid Solution (ASS) phases
based on chemical potentials.
xb
i cb
i ¼ x/C3
i c/C3
i expðu/C3 /C0 u/C3
0i
RTCs
mi
Þð 19Þ
In this equation,xi* and ci* are the mole fraction and the activity
coefﬁcient of componenti in the ASS phase. The term (u*- u0i*)i s
the difference between the chemical potential of the adsorbent
before and after adsorption happens. It can be calculated in term
of Excess Gibbs energy, as well.
u/C3 /C0 u/C3
0i ¼ 1
M0
ðGE/C3
/C0 GEs /C0 GE/C3
0i Þð 20Þ
In Eq.(20), M0 is the molar mass of the adsorbent,GE*, GEs, and
G0i
E* are the excess Gibbs free energy of ASS phase, surface phase,
and component i’s adsorption, respectively. All excess Gibbs free
energies are estimated in Joules. To compute excess Gibbs free
energy, it is more convenient to use the activity coefﬁcient as in
Eq. (21):
GE/C3
RT ¼
Xk
i¼0
n/C3
i ln c/C3
i ð21Þ
In the last equation,ni* is the molar quantity in the ASS phase,
and index 0 refers to the adsorbent, and the activity coefﬁcient can
be computed using a UNIFAC model. The same method was also
applied to solve for the activity coefﬁcient in the surface phase (xi
s):
GEs
RT ¼
Xk
i¼1
ns
i ln ciðxs
i Þð 22Þ
where ni
s is the number of moles of componenti in the surface phase
that is obtained by the following equation:
ns
i ¼ xs
i n/C3
T ð1 /C0 x/C3
0Þð 23Þ
In Eq.(23), xi
s is the fraction of componenti in the surface phase
that is calculated using Eq.(24):
xs
i ¼ x/C3
i
ð1 /C0 x/C3
0Þ ð24Þ
For the pure component adsorption, the excess Gibbs free
energy G0i
E* is calculated using the activity coefﬁcient for the
adsorption of a pure component (c0i*) computed via Eq.(25):
c/C3
0i ¼ 1 þ 1
Cs
miM0
ð25Þ
Modiﬁed UNIFAC model:
This modiﬁed version of the UNIFAC model is used to compute
the activity coefﬁcient (ci*) as (Bertiet al.(Berti et al., 1999)):
ln c/C3
i ¼ ln c/C3
0i þ ln c/C3
GE;i ð26Þ
In Eq. (26), cGE,i* is the part of the activity coefﬁcient which
depends on concentration and is divided into combinatorial (ci
C*)
and residual (ci
R*) parts:
ln c/C3
GE;i ¼ ln cC/C3
i þ ln cR/C3
i ð27Þ
Each of the combinatorial and residual parts is calculated by
Eqs. (28) and (29), respectively:
ln cC/C3
i ¼ ln cC/C3
GE;iðx/C3
i Þ/C0 ln cC/C3
GE;iðx/C3
0iÞð 28Þ
ln cR/C3
i ¼ ln cR/C3
GE;iðx/C3
i Þ/C0 ln cR/C3
GE;jðx/C3
0iÞð 29Þ
cGE,i*(x0i*) is the activity coefﬁcient of pure adsorbate and the
adsorbent.
Activity coefﬁcient for bulk phase and adsorbate solid solution
phase:
In order to estimate the activity coefﬁcients in the bulk phase,
the UNIFAC model has been applied. The UNIFAC model is divided
into two parts: the combinatorial and the residual parts, which is
shown in Eq.(30):
ln cb
i ¼ ln cCb
i þ ln cRb
i ð30Þ
where ci
Cb and ci
Rbare the activity coefﬁcients for the combinatorial
part and residual part of the bulk phase, respectively. The combina-
torial part can be calculated by:
ln cCb
i ¼ ln ui
xb
i
 !
þ 5qi ln hi
ui
/C18/C19
þ li /C0 ui
xb
i
Xj
1
xb
j lj i–j ð31Þ
where
li ¼ 5 ri /C0 qiðÞ /C0 ð ri /C0 1Þð 32Þ
hi ¼ qixb
iPM
j qjxb
j
ð33Þ
ui ¼ rixb
iPM
j rjxb
j
ð34Þ
In the latest equations,qi and ri are the parameters for van der
Waals surface area and van der Waals radius of the componenti
and are calculated by Eqs.(35) and (36). hi and ui are the molecular
surface area and volume fraction of componenti, respectively, and
j:1,2... M represents the number of components.
ri ¼
XNgt
g
#ðiÞ
g Rg ð35Þ
qi ¼
XNgt
g
#ðiÞ
g Qg ð36Þ
Here, g is the group index, and it is from 1 toNgt, which is the
total functional groups of the molecule.Rg and Qg are the constants
representing van der Waals volume, and surface area and they are
obtained from atomic and molecular structure data.
For the residual part,
ln Cg ¼ Qg½1 /C0 ln
Xm
1
hmWmg
 !
/C0
Xm
1
hmWgm
Pn
1hnWnm
/C138ð 37Þ
where m and n are representative of all functional groups.
The group fraction (Xm) and the surface area fraction (hm) are
calculated using Eqs.(38) and (39), respectively:
Xm ¼
Pj
i#ðiÞ
m xb
j
Pj
1
Pn
1#ðiÞ
m vb
j
ð38Þ
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
6

hm ¼ QmXmPn
1QnXm
ð39Þ
The parameterWnm which is appeared in Eq.(37), is given by:
Wnm ¼ expð/C0 anm=TÞð 40Þ
where, anm is the group interaction parameters for the UNIFAC
model, andT is the temperature in Kelvin. At the deposition temper-
ature, T, the parameterWnm is estimated using the group interac-
tion parameters and T to estimate the activity coefﬁcient.
2.3. CAMD for ALD precursor design
The primary objective of this study is to design novel precur-
sor materials for ALD, which results in enhanced deposition
growth rate, shortening the overall deposition time. The growth
rate (GR) (nm/cyc) is deﬁned as the thickness of deposited thin
ﬁlm per cycle of deposition. It depends on the incident ﬂux of
the precursor and the sticking probability of the molecules.
The property depends on adsorption temperature as well
(Johnson et al., 2014). The growth rate can also be estimated
from:
maxGR ¼
kg; T
n/C3
i NAhi
cml
i
ð41Þ
where ni* is the moles of adsorbate (titanium) which are
adsorbed on silicon in each cycle (moles/cyc), NA is Avogadro’s
number (number of constituent particles/mole), hi is the thick-
ness of each adsorbate (nm), andci
ml is the number of adsorbates
in monolayer. A large value of GR will be due to a large value
for ni*, indicating a higher amount of adsorbate has been
adsorbed on the substrate. Thus, maximizing the growth rate
will result in reducing the deposition time when the speciﬁc ﬁlm
thickness is desired. The objective function in Eq.(41) is subject
to a set of linear and nonlinear equality and inequality con-
straints, including material balance, bounds for the decision vari-
ables, structural feasibility, and thermodynamic equilibrium (as
described above). Here, the decision variables, represented by
kg , are the number of times each functional group (gÞ appears
in the precursor molecule, and the process temperature, T. In
this work, we are using three functional groups (N, CH 2 and
CH3) obtained from two different precursors, TDMAT and TDEAT,
the interaction parameters of which are obtained in the ﬁrst part
of this paper.
Eqs. (42) and (43) represent the constraints for mole fractions in
bulk and ASS phases, respectively.
0 /C20 xb
i /C20 1 8i 2 1 /C1/C1/C1 4½/C138 ð42Þ
0 /C20 x/C3
i /C20 1 8i 2 0 and 1½/C138 ð 43Þ
Eq. (44) corresponds to the non-negativity of the growth rate
(D1*). The deposition rate parameter itself can be computed by
Eq. (45).
D/C3
1 /C21 0 ð44Þ
D/C3
1 ¼ n/C3
1
m/C3
T
ð45Þ
In which,mT* (g) is the total mass, including the mass of silicon
substrate and the mass of adsorbed titanium.
Eq. (46) displays the molar balance constraints in which the
entering moles have to be equal or greater than the sum of the
moles depositing on the substrate and the moles staying in the
bulk phase after equilibrium.
n1
T /C0ð n/C3
T þ nb
T Þ/C21 0 ð46Þ
And Eq.(47) represents the constraints for the total number of
moles in the bulk phase that lies between no adsorption to total
adsorption of all moles entering the ALD chamber:
0 /C20 nb
T /C20 n1
T ð47Þ
To make sure the thermodynamic equilibrium is satisﬁed, Eq.
(48) is applied in whichtol stands for tolerance and is set to 10-8.
The calculation of each term in Eq.(48) are described in detail in
the ﬁrst part of this paper (Eq.(19)). It is worth mentioning thatCmi-
s is the surface phase capacity of the substrate (silicon).
xb
i cb
i /C0 x/C3
i c/C3
i expðu/C3 /C0 u/C3
0i
RTCs
mi
Þ
/C12/C12/C12/C12
/C12/C12/C12/C12 /C20 tol ð48Þ
Eq. (49) represents the structural feasibility constraint which
determines the structure of the molecule.
XNgt
g¼1
Val kg
/C0/C1
/C3 kg ¼ 0 ð49Þ
0 /C20 kg /C20 20 8g 2 integer 1 /C1/C1/C1 3½/C138 ð 50Þ
In Eq.(49), Val (kg) is the valence of each group whilekg is the
number of times each group appears in the newly designed mole-
cule of the precursor, andNgt is the total number of functional
groups used.Table 1shows the valence of each group used to pre-
dict new precursors. Since CH2 always appears with CH3, the
valence of CH2 is not considered independently in this work. Eq.
(50) shows the boundaries for kg as a discrete variable which
may vary between 0 and 20, i.e., each functional group can appear
a maximum of twenty times or it may not appear at all. The indexg
represents the functional groups, which are between 1 and 3,
according to the three groups: N, CH2, and CH3. Therefore, the three
functional groups, each of them may appear up to a maximum of
20 times with different combinations to produce novel precursor
molecules. The general structure of the candidate molecule will
be according to:
NðÞ k1
CH2ðÞ k2
CH3ðÞ k3
Each of these candidate structures is screened for structural fea-
sibility as in Eq.(49).
2.4. Solution method for ALD precursor design
The precursor design problem is formulated as a mixed integer
nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem seeking to maximize the
growth rate in ALD subject to the constraints mentioned inSec-
tion 2.3. The MINLP problem is solved by a novel metaheuristic
optimization algorithm called Efﬁcient Ant Colony Optimization
(EACO). The solution strategy which combines the EACO algorithm
and CAMD is presented in this section.Fig. 4 shows the solution
strategy in which the EACO algorithm generates new precursor
molecules from the functional groups, while CAMD predicts the
properties of the molecules.
EACO for precursor molecule generation
The precursor design is an MINLP problem that is a non-convex
in nature which challenges the derivative-based methods.
However, a metaheuristic optimization strategy such as genetic
algorithm, simulated annealing, or ant colony optimization is
Table 1
Valences of each group.
Group Ti N CH 2 CH3
Valence +4 /C0 30 + 1
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
7

found to be appropriate for the problem (Dorigo, 1992; Holland,
1992; Kirkpatrick et al., 1983 ). The ant colony optimization
(ACO) algorithm is a probabilistic technique initially proposed by
Dorigo (Dorigo, 1992; Dorigo and Di Caro, 1999). The inspiration
for this metaheuristic optimization method was the foraging
behavior of the real ants where the cooperation of some simple,
independent, and asynchronous agents results in ﬁnding a good
solution to a problem at hand. Real ants randomly look for food
in the vicinity of their nests, and if one of them locates a food
source, on the way back to the nest, it releases a chemical sub-
stance named pheromone. The pheromone will act as an indirect
way of communication between ants since it attracts the other
members of the colony to follow the same path. As the pheromone
will evaporate over time, only the routes that were used more fre-
quently will remain attractive due to a higher concentration of
pheromone. Pheromone evaporation has an advantage that the
unfavorable routes will be forgotten over time, and this reduces
the chance of ﬁnding a locally optimal solution. Therefore, the
shorter the routes, the more attractive they are for the ants, and
these routes will have higher concentrations of pheromone than
longer paths. Consequently, more ants will be attracted to the
shorter routes in the future, and the ant colony will hopefully dis-
cover the shortest path.
A similar mechanism is implied by the ACO algorithm to solve
optimization problems. In ACO algorithms, artiﬁcial ants as the
stochastic candidate for solution construction procedures utilize
a pheromone model and possibly available heuristic information
of the mathematical model. The only way of communication
among the artiﬁcial ants is the artiﬁcial pheromone trails (i.e.,
numeric values). A similar mechanism to the evaporation of the
pheromone trail of the real ants would be pheromone decay, which
allows the artiﬁcial ants to forget the past history and focus on new
promising search directions. According to the information learned
in the preceding iteration, the pheromone values are updated and
leads to very good and, hopefully, a globally optimal solution.
Diwekar and Gebreslassie ( Diwekar and Gebreslassie, 2016;
Gebreslassie and Diwekar, 2015) derived a new variant of ant col-
ony optimization called EACO, which is used in this work to solve
the combinatorial problem of designing novel precursors for ALD.
In EACO, a bettern-dimensional uniformity property of Hammers-
ley Sequence Sampling (HSS) is used to generate the random num-
bers, which improves the performance of the conventional ACO
algorithm for combinatorial, continuous, and mixed variable opti-
mization problems (Diwekar and Ulas, 2000). The major steps in
EACO algorithm, used to solve the ALD precursor design problem,
is shown inTable 1and the algorithm proposed in this work that
combines CAMD and EACO algorithm is shown inFig. 4.
As displayed inFig. 4, the algorithm parameters, the functional
groups as building blocks, and their properties such as volume and
surface area parameters, and the UNIFAC interaction parameters
between the components (functional groups) as obtained in the
ﬁrst part of this paper series are ﬁrst introduced. The problem of
CAMD involves ﬁnding an optimal combination of numbers for
each group combined to form a precursor molecule and tempera-
ture of the process to enhance the growth rate. The step involves
selecting the number for each group and the temperature to gener-
ate the precursor molecules. Once the precursor molecule is gener-
ated, the CAMD predicts the precursor properties, such as the
activity coefﬁcients and the growth rate. Then, the predicted prop-
erties are examined by molar balance equations, constraints, and
thermodynamic conditions. If the optimal criterion is satisﬁed,
the generated precursor molecule is a candidate precursor; other-
wise, another molecule is generated by another possible combina-
tion of the functional groups.
The EACO solver used to optimize the precursor design problem
is shown inTable 2. The program needs an initial set of parameters
as following: number of Ants (nAnts), size of the solution archive
(ks), number of continuous (NC), and discrete decision variables
(ND), the pheromone evaporation factor (q), an ACO algorithm
parameter (q), and the termination criteria. The termination crite-
ria are the maximum number of iterations (MAXITER), the maxi-
mum number of consecutive iterations with no improvement of
the objective function (CONITER), and tolerance (EPS). The solution
archive (SArc) is initiated using the HSS technique, which has a
dimension of ks by the number of decision variables (NDIM). The
objective function is evaluated with the solution archive. The qual-
ity of the objective, as obtained from each solution in the archive, is
used to rank them. A Gaussian function is used to determine the
weight of each solution according to their rank in the solution
archive. The termination criteria are tested in the second part of
the algorithm. If the termination criteria are not satisﬁed, an ant
selects one of the solutions in the solution archive probabilistically
as a solution construction guide. The solution guide is selected by
comparing the probability value of the selected solution and a ran-
dom number. If the probability value of the selected solution is
greater or equal to the random number, the solution is selected
as the solution guide to generate a new solution. All ants generate
new solutions using this solution guide. The solution construction
is accomplished in an incremental manner, variable by variable.
For each decision variable, a new solution is generated by sampling
a Gaussian Kernel generated from the mean and standard deviation
of the selected solution guide. The objective function is evaluated
from the new solution. In the next step, the new solutions are
Fig. 4. The solution strategy for the ALD precursor design problem.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
8

stored along with the solution archive from the previous steps. The
new combined solution is sorted by the quality of objective values,
and the bestks solutions are selected. This updating is similar to
the pheromone value update where the artiﬁcial ants are moving
towards the best solution possible. Finally, the solution is updated
by comparing the best solution so far, and the best solution from
the updated solution archive. The second part (b inTable 2) contin-
ues until one of the stopping criteria is satisﬁed.
The precursor design problem includes equality and inequality
constraints, as shown in the problem formulation. The EACO algo-
rithm used in this work implements these constraints through an
oracle penalty method introduced by Schluter et al.( Schlüter
et al., 2009). Oracle penalty method is a generalized technique that
can handle formidable constrained optimization problem that can
be difﬁcult to implement otherwise. In this method, the objective
function is ﬁrst transformed into an equality constraint and mak-
ing the original objective function inessential. In this way, mini-
mizing the original equality and inequality constraints and that
of the new constraint from the objective become comparable. A
penalty function is created by using the comparable property of
the two. In some cases, the penalty function is created by a
weighted sum of original objective function and constraints. In this
way, the penalty function balances its penalty weight between the
transformed objective function and constraint violation. This pen-
alty function becomes the new objective function. Because of its
simplicity, the oracle penalty function is used extensively. An
example of the implementation of the oracle penalty function
can be found in a study by Schluter and Gerdts (Schlüter and
Gerdts, 2010).
Optimization for interaction parameters
CAMD is used to design new materials having speciﬁc proper-
ties. In CAMD, new molecules are developed by selecting a combi-
nation of functional groups (Gani et al., 1991). In the present work,
our goal is to develop novel precursors for ALD. However, CAMD
requires the properties of the functional groups. Based on experi-
mental data from four different ALD systems (Section 3), the UNI-
FAC interaction parameters of the functional groups (abnm and
aanm), which are not found in literature, are obtained using EACO
algorithm. The values of interaction parameters are estimated by
minimizing the objective function, which is an error function
(Err) that estimates the difference between experimental and the-
oretical values.
In the present problem, the Err is estimated by ﬁnding the dif-
ference between GRexp and GRcalc. For each ALD system, the error
function is minimized, separately. Since the interaction parameters
are determined to be the decision variables in the model, their
accuracy is proved by the agreement ofGRexp and GRcalc.
As displayed inFig. 5, we use EACO algorithm to minimize the
sum of the errors between theGRexp and GRcalc. The expression is
shown by Eq.(51):
minErr ¼ min
XEq
1
GRcalc /C0 GRexp
/C0/C1 2hi
ð51Þ
where Eq is the number of data points used to solve the problem. In
the present work, around 8–15 data points are used for each ALD
problem depending on the saturation curve. In Eq.(51), GRcalc is
the calculated growth that can be estimated by Eq.(41).
The group interaction parameters measure the difference
between the energy of interaction of two groups, here, m and n
or two same groups, m and m (Fredenslund, 2012; Fredenslund
et al., 1977). If two groups are the same, this difference would be
zero. Moreover, the interaction parameters between the functional
groups on the adsorbent is equal to zero (Berti et al., 1999). Thus,
the interaction parameters in the ASS phase have only been consid-
ered between the adsorbate and the adsorbent. Also, the interac-
tion parameters between each group with inert gas have been
assumed to be zero as inert gas acts as the carrier gas, and it does
not react with the functional groups.
2.5. Validation of results
From the optimal values of the interaction parameters, the
growth rates have been computed theoretically (GRcalc) as given
in Eq.(41) and compared to the experimental growth rates (GRexp)
for all the four materials used in this work. The R2 values have been
calculated by Eq. (52) to further compare the calculated growth
rates to the experimental growth rates.
R2 ¼ 1 /C0
PErr2
Pn
i¼1 GRðiÞ
exp /C0 GRave
exp
/C16/C17 2 ð52Þ
where n is the number of data points andGRave
expis the average of
experimental growth rates.
3. Case studies
As mentioned before, the case studies are conducted with four
ALD experiments that have used TDMAT, TDEAT, tetrakis (diethy-
lamino) hafnium (TDEAH), and tetrakis (ethylmethylamino) haf-
nium (TEMAH) as precursor materials. Each precursor material is
divided into functional groups and their interaction parameters
with the substrate and with each other are obtained using opti-
mization theory. Details about the experiments and the functional
groups are given below.
3.1. TDMAT
The ﬁrst experimental data used in the present work, has been
obtained from a paper by Xieet al.(Xie et al., 2007). They used tet-
rakis (dimethylamido) titanium (TDMAT) as the precursor and
water vapor as the co-reactant to deposit TiO2 on silicon and argon
as the carrier gas. The TDMAT bubbler was heated to 30/C176C, and the
temperature of the reactor was 50/C176C. They provided thickness ver-
sus precursor pulse time, and the thickness can be related to the
growth rate by dividing thickness by the number of cycles. To
Table 2
Summary of EACO algorithm (Diwekar and Gebreslassie, 2016; Gebreslassie and
Diwekar, 2015).
a. Start program
Set initial parameters (i.e., ks, nAnts, NC, ND,q, q) and termination
criteria
Initialize solution archive (SArc (ks, NDIM)) using HSS
Combine and evaluate the objective function of the k solutions
Rank solutions based on the quality of the objective function
(SArc = Rank(S1, ... ,Sks))
Evaluate the weight of each solution based on rank
b. While the termination criterion is not satisﬁed
Generate solutions equivalent to the number of ants
For all # nAnts
Incremental solution construction
For all # NDIM
s Probabilistically construct discrete decision variables
s Probabilistically construct continuous decision variables
End for # NDIM
Store and evaluate the objective function value of the newly
generated solutions
End for # nAnts
Combine, rank and select the best k solutions, SArc = Best (rank
(S1... Sks+nAnt),ks)
Update solution archives
End while
End program
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
9

apply the GCM, each TDMAT molecule (Ti(N(CH3)2)4) was divided
into three functional groups: titanium, nitrogen, and methyl
groups. The number of times the functional groups appear in a pre-
cursor molecule are: 1, 4, and 8 for titanium, nitrogen, and methyl,
respectively. Along with the precursor, argon as the carrier gas also
appears in the bulk phase. The UNIFAC interaction parameters in
the bulk and the ASS phases have been shown inTables 3 and 4
and, respectively.
3.2. TDEAT
Selvaraj et al.(Selvaraj et al., 2013) deposited TiO2 using TDEAT
as a precursor and provided the change of growth rate by changing
precursor pulse time. Si (100), used as the substrate, was cut into
2c m /C2 2 cm pieces. They used nitrogen as the carrier gas and
water vapor as the co-reactant. The pressure and temperature of
the reactor were 0.5 Torr and 200/C176C, respectively. The TDEAT bub-
bler temperature was kept at 65/C176C, and the bubbler pressure was
10 Torr (Xu, 2013). The molecular structure of TDEAT (Ti(N(CH2-
CH3)2)4) is similar to TDMAT, and the only difference between
them is that TDEAT has eight methylene groups. Therefore,the
interaction parameters for titanium, nitrogen, and methyl group pre-
dicted from TDMAT may be used for TDEAT as well(Gonzalez et al.,
2007). Table 5shows the interaction parameters of the functional
groups of TDEAT. As seen inTable 5, some of the required interac-
tion parameters have been calculated in the case study (1) since
some of the groups are similar to those of TDMAT (i.e., ab12,a b13,
ab21,a b23,a b31,a b32,). The indexes have not been changed since
the interaction parameters found for TDMAT can be used here.
Table 4 shows the interaction parameters between titanium and
silicon, which is applicable for this case study, as well.
3.3. TDEAH
The third precursor studied in this work is TDEAH. The growth
rate vs. precursor pulse time was provided by Deshpandeet al.
(Deshpande et al., 2004) that deposited HfO2 on silicon using
TDEAH precursor and water vapor as the co-reactant. Their carrier
gas was argon, and the substrates were cut into 2.5 cm/C2 2.5 cm.
The reactor temperature and pressure have been reported as
300 /C176C, and 0.5 Torr, respectively, and the bubbler temperature
was 70/C176C( Kragh et al., 2008). If the molecular structure of TDEAH
(Hf(N(CH2CH3)2)4) is compared with TDEAT, it can be easily seen
that the only atom, which is different, is hafnium. Most of the
Fig. 5. Solution strategy applied for optimal interaction parameter selection using the EACO algorithm.
Table 4
UNIFAC interaction parameters (aanm) for the ASS phase, TDEAT.
Groups Ti Si
Ti 0 aa12
Si aa21 0
Table 3
UNIFAC interaction parameters (abnm) for the bulk phase, TDMAT.
Groups Ti N CH 3 Ar
Ti 0 ab12 ab13 0
N ab21 0 ab23 0
CH3 ab31 ab32 00
A r 0000
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
10

interaction parameters are common with the ones that were com-
puted for TDEAT and are used here.
The interaction parameters for TDEAH are shown inTables 6
and 7 for the bulk and the ASS phases, respectively. The indexes
contain zero to be differentiated from the ones for previous precur-
sors. There is a total of six unknown values in the bulk phase (i.e.,
ab02,a b03,a b04,a b20,a b30,a b40) and two in the ASS phase (i.e., aa02,
aa20) that are unique in TDEAH and are necessary to be found using
optimization.
3.4. TEMAH
The last precursor studied here is TEMAH. Liuet al. (Liu et al.,
2005) used TEMAH as the precursor to deposit HfO2 on silicon,
and the saturation curve of growth rate versus precursor pulse
time has been provided in their paper. The bubbler and reactor
temperature were 80/C176C and 250/C176C, respectively, and the reactor
pressure was 0.5 Torr. Using the Antoine constants, one is able to
ﬁnd the vapor pressure of TEMAH (Rushworth et al., 2005). The
functional groups of TEMAH are similar to TDEAH, and its molecu-
lar structure is Hf(N(CH3(C2H5))4. The only difference between
TEMAH and TDEAH is the number of methylene groups. To study
this precursor, we were able to use the UNIFAC interaction param-
eters, which are found for TDEAH and the only change was the
number of times the methylene groups are appearing in the
precursor.
4. Results and discussions
4.1. Estimation of interaction parameters with GCM by minimizing the
error
The interaction parameter optimization problem is solved using
the EACO algorithm as given in Gebreslassie and Diwekar
(Gebreslassie and Diwekar, 2015). The algorithm terminates if it
reaches the maximum number of iterations (MAXITER = 3000), or
if the tolerance (EPS = 1E-6), which is the relative difference
between the solutions found in two consecutive iterations, is lower
than or equal to the parameterEPS for a set of a consecutive num-
ber of iterations (CONITER = 200). The parameters used in the EACO
algorithm are the solution archive sizeKs = 50, number of ants
nAnts = 10, q = 1E-5, and pheromone evaporation parameter
q = 0.85. The main results are given below.
The different structural and functional groups from TDEAT,
TDMAT, TDEAH, and TEMAH have been identiﬁed.Table 8 gives
the functional groups and their van der Waals volume (m3), (Rg)
and surface area (m2), (Qg) values. Appendix A in Supplementary
Information shows how these values are calculated.
The resulting optimal interaction parameters for each precursor
and between all the functional groups in the bulk phase and the
ASS phase are shown inTables 9 and 10. As mentioned before,
the interaction parameters have been computed using the GCM
for four different precursors: TDEAT, TDMAT, TDEAH, and TEMAH.
The objective function value ranges from 10-6-10-3.
The isotherms of theoretical and experimental growth rates
versus precursor pulse times are shown inFigs. 6–9 for TDMAT,
TDEAT, TDEAH, and TEMAH, respectively. For TDMAT and TDEAT,
since there were not enough data points before saturation, we
interpolated the experimental points. The R2 values for each mate-
rial are also presented. It has been found that the R2 value for
TDMAT, the ﬁrst compound, is 0.85. The quality of ﬁt increased
for the rest of the compounds, where the interaction parameters
for some of the groups obtained from other precursor materials
are used. For example, the functional groups of precursors TDMAT
are Ti, N and CH3, whereas that of TDEAT is Ti, N, CH2, and CH3.
Thus, the interaction parameters of Ti, N, and CH3 with each other
obtained from the simulation of growth rate from TDMAT is used
for TDEAT. The R2 value for TDEAT is 0.99, suggesting the useful-
ness of using properties of the functional group estimated from
one system to another.
The R2 value for TDEAH and TEMAH is 0.93. TDEAH uses inter-
action parameters between N, CH2, and CH3 estimated from simu-
lating growth rate from both TDMAT and TDEAT. In fact, all the
interaction parameters used for the growth rates for TEMAH are
calculated using the interaction parameters obtained from TDMAT,
TDEAT, and TDEAH without conducting any simulation. Low error
functions and R2 values close to one indicate that the values of
GRcalc are close toGRexp, which displays a good agreement between
estimated values of growth rates and experimental data. The use of
group interaction parameters calculated from one precursor for
other precursors for predicting thermodynamically complex phe-
nomena like growth rate shows that the group contribution
method is useful for property estimation of any material having
the same functional group.
4.2. Results from the design of ALD titanium precursors using CAMD
The new precursors are created with three functional groups (N,
CH2,C H3) coming from two different precursors, TDMAT and
TDEAT. As mentioned inSection 2, the goal was to ﬁnd the optimal
combination of the functional groups that will maximize the
Table 5
UNIFAC interaction parameters (abnm) for the bulk phase, TDEAT.
Groups Ti N CH 3 CH2 N2
Ti 0 ab12 ab13 ab14 0
N ab21 0 ab23 ab24 0
CH3 ab31 ab32 0 ab34 0
CH2 ab41 ab42 ab43 00
N2 00000
Table 6
UNIFAC interaction parameters (abnm) for the bulk phase, TDEAH.
Groups Hf N CH 3 CH2 Ar
Hf 0 ab02 ab03 ab04 0
N ab20 0 ab23 ab24 0
CH3 ab30 ab32 0 ab34 0
CH2 ab40 ab42 ab43 00
A r 00000
Table 7
UNIFAC interaction parameters (aanm) for the ASS phase, TDEAH.
Groups Hf Si
Hf 0 aa02
Si aa20 0
Table 8
Van der Waals volume (Rg) and surface area (Qg) of each functional group.
Group Rg (m3) Qg (m2)
Si 1.1622 0.3351
Ti 1.6528 0.3498
Hf 1.496 0.3274
N 0.6193 0.1818
CH3 0.9011 0.848
CH2 0.6744 0.54
N2 0.6812 0.1936
Ar 1.105 0.2675
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
11

growth rate given in Eq.(41). There were three discrete and two
continuous variables used in EACO of the precursor design prob-
lem. The discrete variables are the number of times each functional
group (i.e., N, CH2,C H3) may appear in the newly designed precur-
sor, and the continuous variables refer to the moles of titanium
that will be retained in the bulk phase after equilibrium as well
as deposition temperature. Since the conﬁguration of the designed
molecule that dictates the amount adsorbed is not known a priori,
we have used the number of moles remained in the bulk phase
after ALD as a decision variable instead of the initial number of
moles. For the initial number of moles, a ﬁxed value of precursor
per liter of the inlet feed (0.00039 mol of precursor*pulse time/
Liter) is used for our analysis. All calculations are performed on a
substrate weight of 0.65 g. At each iteration, we started with the
given number of initial moles. From the number of moles adsorbed
at equilibrium, we select a subset of functional groups and temper-
ature and ensure that the thermodynamic equilibrium of adsorp-
tion process (Eq.(48)) is satisﬁed within a tolerance. Each of the
three functional groups is allowed to appear up to a maximum of
20 times. The search space is composed of 8000 (i.e., 203) possible
combinations. With temperature as a continuous decision variable,
the search space increases exponentially. The algorithm is shown
in Table 2. It terminates if it reaches the maximum number of iter-
ations (MAXITR = 3000), or if the tolerance (EPS = 1E-10), that is, the
difference between solutions in two consecutive iterations is less
than or equals toEPS or equals toEPS for a consecutive number
of iterations (CONITER = 50). The parameters used for the EACO
algorithm are solution archive size (Ks = 50), number of ants
(nAnts = 200), pheromone evaporation ( q ¼ 0:85Þ, algorithm
parameter (q ¼ 1e /C0 3Þ, and Oracle (X ¼ 1e /C0 2Þ.
Through CAMD, the algorithm generated 41 unique optimal
combinations. The structural integrity of the designed precursor
is conﬁrmed by controlling the net valency in the molecule. The
parameters used for this simulation are the maximum number of
times each functional group can be present in the optimally
designed precursor, as well as the deposition temperature. From
the Forty-one unique molecules, we present the top 10 here
(Table 11), and they are ranked based on the maximum growth
rate. Besides the growth rate, the penalty function, the optimized
deposition temperature corresponding to each molecule, molecu-
lar formula, and a suggested structure of the designed precursors
are shown inTable 11. The highest growth rate (1.65 Å/cycle) is
obtained for a molecule with 1 Ti atom, 8 N, 20 CH2, and 20 CH3
groups at a deposition temperature of 327 /C176C. Since the
precursors are in the gas phase, the predicted structures can
be the combination of molecules. For instance, in the case of
Table 10
Calculated UNIFAC interaction parameters in the ASS phase.
Groups Ti Hf Si
Ti 0 N/A /C0 178.61
Hf N/A 0 10757.12
Si 6428.9 11276.49 0
Table 9
Calculated UNIFAC interaction parameters in the bulk phase.
Groups Ti Hf N CH 3 CH2 N2 Ar
Ti 0 N/A /C0 613.9 2030.8 /C0 968.9 0 0
Hf N/A 0 6239.30 3859.6 /C0 1177.39 0 0
N /C0 3181.5 4308.12 0 /C0 1.96e05 15169.17 0 0
CH3 /C0 5772.7 3307.80 3562.9 0 16648.73 0 0
CH2 /C0 10044.1 /C0 9864.72 18222.55 4884.35 0 0 0
N2 000 000 0
Ar 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
02468 1 0 1 2
Growth Rtae (nm/cyc)
Pulse Time (s)
TDMAT
GR calc
GR exp (Interpolated)
GR exp
R2 = 0.85
Fig. 6.Comparison of experimental growth rate found in literature and calculated growth rates using the UNIFAC model as a function of TDMAT pulse time. Orange dots show
the experimental growth rate in which deposition was carried out at 50/C176C substrate temperature using 3 s water vapor pulse (Xie et al., 2007). (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
12

TiN8(CH2)20(CH3)20, the combination of TDEAT and [N(Et)3]4 would
be the proposed structure, which results in higher growth rate
than TDEAT.
The designed precursor molecules are compared to some of the
existing precursors. Some of the commonly used precursors to
deposit TiO2 by ALD are as following:
/C15 TDMAT;
/C15 TDEAT;
/C15 Tetrakis(ethylmethylamino)titanium(IV) (TEMAT);
/C15 Titanium(IV) isopropoxide (TTIP);
/C15 Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4).
The properties of the above-mentioned precursors, along with
some examples of less common titanium precursors, are summa-
rized in Table 12, and some example references have been cited.
Some precursors can be used along with both O3 and water vapor
as the oxygen source (Katamreddy et al., 2008). The precursor sat-
uration dose is different depending on which oxygen source is
used, and it may result in different growth rates as well (Kim
and Kim, 2012). The precursor saturation dose and the growth rate
for both oxygen sources are included inTable 12, where the ﬁrst
number in each column is related to the ﬁrst oxygen source, and
the second number separated by a comma is related to the second
oxygen source. Katamreddyet al. (Katamreddy et al., 2009) have
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
00 . 511 . 522 . 533 . 544 . 5
Growth Rate (nm/cyc)
Pulse Time (s)
TDEAT
GR calc
GR exp (interpolated)
GR exp
R2 = 0.99
Fig. 7. Comparison of experimental growth rate found in literature and calculated growth rates using the UNIFAC model as a function of TDEAT pulse time. Orange dots show
the experimental growth rate in which deposition was carried out at 200/C176C substrate temperature using 1 s water vapor pulse (Selvaraj et al., 2013). (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
02468 1 0 1 2 1 4
Growth Rate (nm/cyc)
Pulse time (s)
TDEAH
GR calc
GR exp
R2 = 0.93
Fig. 8. Comparison of experimental growth rate found in literature and calculated growth rates using the UNIFAC model as a function of TDEAH pulse time. Orange dots show
the experimental growth rate in which deposition was carried out at 300/C176C substrate temperature using 0.8 s water vapor pulse (Deshpande et al., 2004). (For interpretation
of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
13

0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
00 . 511 . 522 . 533 . 544 . 5
Growth Rate (nm/cyc)
Pulse time (s)
TEMAH
GR calc
GR exp
R2 = 0.93
Fig. 9.Comparison of experimental growth rate found in literature and calculated growth rates using the UNIFAC model as a function of TEMAH pulse time. Orange dots show
the experimental growth rate in which deposition was carried out at 250/C176C substrate temperature using 0.4 s water vapor pulse (Liu et al., 2005). (For interpretation of the
references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 11
The properties of optimal precursor materials designed for ALD.
Rank Growth rate (Å/cyc) Penalty function Deposition temperature ( /C176C) Molecular formula Suggested structure
1 1.6522 /C0 0.175 327 TiN 8(CH2)20(CH3)20 TDEAT + [N(Et)3]4
2 1.6395 /C0 0.174 327 TiN 8(CH2)16(CH3)20 TDEAT + [NMe(Et)2]4
3 1.6244 /C0 0.172 327 TiN 6(CH2)20(CH3)14 TDEAT + [N(Pr)3]2
4 1.6090 /C0 0.171 327 TiN 5(CH2)20(CH3)11 TDEAT + N(Pe)3
5 1.5922 /C0 0.169 327 TiN 4(CH2)20(CH3)8 [(PrBu)N]4Ti
6 1.5880 /C0 0.169 327 TiN 4(CH2)19(CH3)8 [(PrBu)N]3Ti[(Pr)2N]
7 1.5314 /C0 0.163 327 TiN 2(CH2)16(CH3)2 [N(CH2)5]2Ti[Bu]2
8 1.3932 /C0 0.149 27 TiN 8(CH2)20(CH3)20 TDEAT + [N(Et)3]4
9 1.3900 /C0 0.149 27 TiN 8(CH2)19(CH3)20 TDEAT + NMe(Et)2 + [N(Et)3]3
10 1.3893 /C0 0.149 37 TiN 8(CH2)20(CH3)20 TDEAT + [N(Et)3]4
Table 12
Properties of existing precursor molecules for TiO2 ALD/atomic layer epitaxy.
Precursor Common oxygen
source
Precursor saturation
dose (s)
Temperature
window (/C176C)
Growth rate
(Å/cycle)
Reference
TDMAT H 2O, O3 0.15–10, 0.5–5 50–330 0.33–1.20, 0.40–0.65 ( Abendroth et al., 2013; Jin et al., 2015;
Katamreddy et al., 2008; Kim and Kim, 2012;
Shahmohammadi et al., 2020a; Xie et al., 2007)
TDEAT H 2O, O3 5, 5 125–250 0.25, 0.40 ( Katamreddy et al., 2008)
TEMAT H 2O, O3 5, 10 125–225 0.40, 0.55 ( Katamreddy et al., 2008)
TTIP H 2O 0.04/ 0.6 * 280–290 0.02/ 0.30 * (Aarik et al., 2000; Avril et al., 2014; Mikko
Ritala et al., 1994)
TiCl4 H2O, O3 0.5, 5 Up to 600 0.40–0.75 ( Aarik et al., 2013; Hwang, 2014; Leem et al.,
2014; Ritala et al., 1993)
Ti(OiPr)2(tmhd**)2 O3,H 2O 2, 2 370–400 0.20, 0.43 ( Hwang, 2014; Lee et al., 2011)
Ti(OEt)4 H2O 1.5 250–325 0.40 ( Mikko Ritala et al., 1994)
Ti(OMe)4 H2O 0.6 250–300 0.50 ( Pore et al., 2004)
Ti(OtBu)4 H2O 2 150–200 0.25 ( Weon Hwang et al., 2007)
PrimeTi O 3 4 250–325 0.27 ( Katamreddy et al., 2009)
StarTi O 3 5 150–400 0.30 ( Katamreddy et al., 2009)
TyALD O 3 7 225–275 0.40 ( Katamreddy et al., 2009)
StarTyALD O 3 7 250–350 0.30 ( Katamreddy et al., 2009)
* The saturation dose and growth rate for this precursor was different in two different references mentioned.
** tmhd = 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedione.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
14

studied the properties of some non-common Ti precursors for ALD,
which are included inTable 12 (i.e., PrimeTi, StarTi, TyALD, and
StarTyALD).
As can be seen inTable 12, the existing precursors have some
limitations. For instance, some of them result in a low growth rate,
need a rather high pulse time to saturate the surface, have a lim-
ited temperature window, or are only functional at high tempera-
tures. The only precursors that result in rather high growth rates in
some ALD conditions are TDMAT (Xie et al., 2007), TiCl4 (Leem
et al., 2014), TEMAT (Katamreddy et al., 2008), and Ti(OMe)4
(Pore et al., 2004). The reported growth rate from these precursors
are higher than 0.50 Å/cycle in some conditions but still much
lower than the predicted growth rates from the newly designed
precursors in this work.
Among the precursors with growth rates higher than 0.50 Å/cy-
cle, although TDMAT would result in a high growth rate in some
deposition conditions (Xie et al., 2007), the growth rate from this
precursor strongly depends on the deposition temperature. The
highest growth rate from TDMAT (i.e.,1.20 Å/cycle) has been
reported in the deposition temperature of 50/C176C, where the co-
reactant was water (Xie et al., 2007). Besides, TiCl4 results in a
rather high growth rate (0.75 Å/cycle) at 300/C176C when it reacts with
water (Leem et al., 2014). However, the byproducts of TiCl4 are cor-
rosive (Hwang, 2014), which is not desirable, and it is better to be
substituted. TEMAT is reported to have a growth rate of 0.55 Å/cy-
cle in reaction with O3, but it needs a high saturation pulse time
(10 s) (Katamreddy et al., 2008), which leads to long process time.
The growth rate from Ti(OMe)4 (0.50 Å/cycle) is comparable with
that of TEMAT with a much lower saturation time (0.6 s). However,
Ti(OMe)4 is only functional in high temperatures (250–300 /C176C)
(Pore et al., 2004). The high temperatures are not desired in many
cases such as when the substrate is organic (Shahmohammadi
et al., 2020b, 2020a). Hence, there is still the need for a precursor,
which would result in a high growth rate at low temperatures with
not so long saturation dose. As can be seen inTable 11, three of the
designed precursors result in high growth rates (1.39 Å/cycle) at
temperatures as low as room temperature (Ranks 8–10). It is worth
mentioning that the lowest predicted growth rate from theoreti-
cally designed precursors in this work is 1.23 Å/cycle at 67/C176C (rank
41), which is still higher than, although close to, the highest
reported value from the existing precursors (i.e., 1.20 Å/cycle). In
the future, these precursors will be synthesized and tested exper-
imentally, and a more detailed property study will be performed.
5. Conclusion
In this study, we have developed a technology for the design of
novel precursor materials with enhanced properties for ALD. An
ALD precursor material comprises functional groups and the struc-
tural and functional properties of the precursor depend on those
groups. In the ﬁrst part of this paper, four precursors, i.e., TDMAT,
TDEAT, TDEAH, and TDMAH, which are commonly used in ALD, are
divided into functional groups, and the proposed GCM is applied to
obtain their interaction parameters with the substrate and with
each other. Using experimental data of the ALD growth rate and
the EACO technique, the UNIFAC interaction parameters for the
groups are computed. The interaction parameters are used for
the theoretical estimation of the growth rate at different precursor
pulse times. The estimated values are found to be in good agree-
ment with experimental results. Group interaction parameters cal-
culated from one precursor used for predicting accurate growth
rate from other precursors shows the usefulness of the proposed
theory. In the second part of this paper, the CAMD framework
was used to design ALD precursors that predicted an improved
growth rate of ALD using the properties of the functional groups
that have been developed by the GCM. The optimal design of novel
precursors has been achieved by solving an MINLP problem. The
MINLP problem was successfully solved using EACO algorithm.
The CAMD algorithm for precursor design maximized the growth
rate of the deposited material subjected to structural feasibility,
thermodynamic correlation, as well as process conditions and
other constraints. The proposed methodology was tested success-
fully for the design of precursors for ALD of titanium on a silicon
substrate. Forty-one unique precursors were designed, and ten pre-
cursor molecules were selected based on the predicted growth rate
values. These molecules are possibly the best candidates that can
be used in an ALD process. All of the designed molecules result
in a higher growth rate compared to existing precursors, while sat-
isfying the operating conditions, with the best possible designed
precursor predicted a 40% higher growth rate than the known
one. This method can be applied for the design of ALD precursors
of any metals and metal oxides. Once a comprehensive database
of UNIFAC interaction parameters in bulk and the ASS phases is
obtained, the optimal design of novel precursor materials will
become possible on a large scale. A cost analysis is beyond the
scope of this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mina Shahmohammadi: Validation, Investigation, Writing -
original draft. Rajib Mukherjee: Software, Validation, Investiga-
tion, Writing - original draft.Christos G. Takoudis:Methodology,
Investigation, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project
administration, Funding acquisition.Urmila M. Diwekar:Concep-
tualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Writing - review
& editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Van der Waals volume (Rg) and surface area (Qg).
To represent the group size and surface areas,Rg and Qg can be cal-
culated using van der Waals group volume,Vg, and surface areasAg
as it can be seen in Eqs.(A1) and (A2):
Rg ¼ Vg=15:17 ðA1Þ
Qg ¼ Ag=2:5e9 ðA2Þ
where Vg and Ag are calculated using experimental van der Waals
radius (rw) of each atom (Bondi, 1964; Vogt and Alvarez, 2014)
(Eq. (A3)).
Vg ¼ 4
3 pr3
wNA ðA3Þ
For the surface area value, Eq.(A4) is used:
Ag ¼ pr2
wNA ðA4Þ
Titanium (Ti). In case of Titanium,rw ¼ 2:15Å which is equiva-
lent to 2.15e /C0 8 cm, and NA, the Avogadro number, equals to
6.022e23 moles/molecule. Then, Vg ¼ 25:06cm3=mole and
Ag ¼ 8:7e8cm2=mole. Substituting the values of Vg and Ag into
Eqs. (A1) and (A2), respectively, Rg ¼ 1:652 and Qg ¼ 0:349 are
obtained.
Hafnium (Hf). For Hafnium, rw ¼ 2:1Å which is equivalent to
2.1e /C0 8 cm. That results in Vg ¼ 23:36cm3=mole and
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
15

Ag ¼ 8:34e8cm2=mole, Rg ¼ 1:496, and Qg ¼ 0:327. Table 8 shows
the Rg and Qg values of all the groups used in this work.
References
Aaltonen, T., Ritala, M., Sajavaara, T., Keinonen, J., Leskelä, M., 2003. Atomic layer
deposition of platinum thin ﬁlms. Chem. Mater. 9, 1924–1928.https://doi.org/
10.1021/cm021333t.
Aarik, J., Aidla, A., Uustare, T., Ritala, M., Leskelä, M., 2000. Titanium isopropoxide as
a precursor for atomic layer deposition: Characterization of titanium dioxide
growth process. Appl. Surf. Sci. 161, 385–395.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-
4332(00)00274-9.
Aarik, L., Arroval, T., Rammula, R., Mändar, H., Sammelselg, V., Aarik, J., 2013. Atomic
layer deposition of TiO2 from TiCl4 and O3. Thin Solid Films 542, 100–107.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2013.06.074.
Abendroth, B., Moebus, T., Rentrop, S., Strohmeyer, R., Vinnichenko, M., Weling, T.,
Stöcker, H., Meyer, D.C., 2013. Atomic layer deposition of TiO2 from tetrakis
(dimethylamino) titanium and H2O. Thin Solid Films 545, 176–182.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tsf.2013.07.076.
Avril, L., Reymond-Laruinaz, S., Decams, J.M., Bruyère, S., Potin, V., De Lucas, M.C.M.,
Imhoff, L., 2014. TiO2 anatase ﬁlms obtained by direct liquid injection atomic
layer deposition at low temperature. Appl. Surf. Sci. 288, 201–207.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2013.10.007.
Benavides, P.T., Diwekar, U., 2014. Optimal design of adsorbents for NORM removal
from produced water in natural gas fracking. Part 1: Group contribution method
for adsorption. Chem. Eng. Sci. 137, 964–976. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ces.2015.07.012.
Benavides, P.T., Gebreslassie, B.H., Diwekar, U.M., 2015. Optimal design of
adsorbents for NORM removal from produced water in natural gas fracking.
Part 2: CAMD for adsorption of radium and barium. Chem. Eng. Sci. 137, 977–
985.
Berti, C., Ulbig, P., Burdorf, A., Seippel, J., Schulz, S., 1999. Correlation and prediction
of liquid-phase adsorption on zeolites using group contributions based on
adsorbate-solid solution theory. Langmuir 15, 6035–6042. https://doi.org/
10.1021/la981415p.
Bishal, A.K., Butt, A., Selvaraj, S.K., Joshi, B., Patel, S.B., Yang, B., Shukohfar, T.,
Sukotjo, C., Takoudis, C.G., 2015. Atomic layer deposition in bio-
nanotechnology: a brief overview. Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 43, 255–276.
Bishal, A.K., Sukotjo, C., Jokisaari, J.R., Klie, R.F., Takoudis, C.G., 2018. Enhanced
bioactivity of collagen ﬁber functionalized with room temperature atomic layer
deposited titania. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 34443–34454.https://doi.org/
10.1021/acsami.8b05857.
Bishal, A.K., Sukotjo, C., Takoudis, C., 2017. Room temperature TiO2 atomic layer
deposition on collagen membrane from a titanium alkylamide precursor. J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A: Vac., Surf. Films.https://doi.org/10.1116/1.4972245.
Bondi, A., 1964. Van der waals volumes and radii. J. Phys. Chem. 68, 441–451.
https://doi.org/10.1021/j100785a001.
Camarda, K.V., Sunderesan, P., 2005. An optimization approach to the design of
value-added soybean oil products. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 44, 4361–4367.https://
doi.org/10.1021/ie049400b.
Chang, S., Selvaraj, S.K., Choi, Y.-Y., Hong, S., Nakhmanson, S.M., Takoudis, C.G., 2016.
Atomic layer deposition of environmentally benign SnTiO x as a potential
ferroelectric material. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vac., Surf., Film. 34, 01A119.https://
doi.org/10.1116/1.4935650.
Chemmangattuvalappil, N.G., Eljack, F.T., Solvason, C.C., Eden, M.R., 2009. A novel
algorithm for molecular synthesis using enhanced property operators. Comput.
Chem. Eng. 33, 636–643.
Cheng, H.-C., Wang, F.-S., 2008. Optimal biocompatible solvent design for a two-
stage extractive fermentation process with cell recycling. Comput. Chem. Eng.
32, 1385–1396.
Churi, N., Achenie, L.E.K., 1996. Novel mathematical programming model for
computer aided molecular design. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 35, 3788–3794.
Deshpande, A., Inman, R., Jursich, G., Takoudis, C., 2004. Atomic layer deposition and
characterization of hafnium oxide grown on silicon from tetrakis(diethylamino)
hafnium and water vapor. J. Vac. Sci Technol. A Vac., Surfaces, Film. 22, 2035–
2040. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.1781183.
Diwekar, U.M., Gebreslassie, B.H., 2016. Efﬁcient ant colony optimization (EACO)
algorithm for deterministic optimization. Int. J. Swarm Intell. Evol. Comput. 05.
https://doi.org/10.4172/2090-4908.1000131.
Diwekar, U.M., Ulas, S., 2000. Sampling techniques. Kirk-Othmer Encycl. Chem.
Technol.
Dorigo, M., 1992. Optimization, learning and natural algorithms Ph.D. dissertation.
Politecnico di Milano.
Dorigo, M., Di Caro, G., 1999. Ant colony optimization: A new metaheuristic,
evolutionary computation, in: Proceedings of the 1999 Congress on
Evolutionary Computation-CEC99 (Cat. No. 99TH8406). IEEE, Washington, DC,
USA, pp. 1470–1477.
Doshi, R.K., Mukherjee, R., Diwekar, U.M., 2018. Application of adsorbate solid
solution theory to design novel adsorbents for arsenic removal using CAMD.
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6, 2603–2611.
Duvedi, A.P., Achenie, L.E.K., 1996. Designing environmentally safe refrigerants
using mathematical programming. Chem. Eng. Sci. 51, 3727–3739.
Eden, M.R., Jørgensen, S.B., Gani, R., El-Halwagi, M.M., 2004. A novel framework for
simultaneous separation process and product design. Chem. Eng. Process.
Process Intensif. 43, 595–608.
Eljack, F.T., Eden, M.R., 2008. A systematic visual approach to molecular design via
property clusters and group contribution methods. Comput. Chem. Eng. 32,
3002–3010.
Elliott, S.D., 2005. Predictive process design: A theoretical model of atomic layer
deposition. Comput. Mater. Sci. 33, 20–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.commatsci.2004.12.032.
Folic, M., Adjiman, C.S., Pistikopoulos, E.N., 2008. Computer-aided solvent design for
reactions: maximizing product formation. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47, 5190–5202.
Fredenslund, A., 2012. Vapor-liquid equilibria using UNIFAC: a group-contribution
method. Elsevier.
Fredenslund, A., Gmehling, J., Rasmussen, P., 1977. Vapor-liquid Equilibria Using
UNIFAC: A Group-contribution Methods. Elsevier Scientiﬁc.
Gani, R., Nielsen, B., Fredenslund, A., 1991. A group contribution approach to
computer-aided molecular design. AIChE J. 37, 1318–1332.
Gebreslassie, B.H., Diwekar, U.M., 2015. Efﬁcient ant colony optimization for
computer aided molecular design: Case study solvent selection problem.
Comput. Chem. Eng. 78, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compchemeng.2015.04.004.
George, S.M., 2010. Atomic layer deposition: An overview. Chem. Rev. 110, 111–
131. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr900056b.
Giovanoglou, A., Barlatier, J., Adjiman, C.S., Pistikopoulos, E.N., Cordiner, J.L., 2003.
Optimal solvent design for batch separation based on economic performance.
AIChE J. 49, 3095–3109.
Gonzalez, H.E., Abildskov, J., Gani, R., Rousseaux, P., Le Bert, B., 2007. A method for
prediction of UNIFAC group interaction parameters. AIChE J. 53, 1620–1632.
Gordon, R.G., Hausmann, D., Kim, E., Shepard, J., 2003. A kinetic model for step
coverage by atomic layer deposition in narrow holes or trenches. Chem. Vap.
Depos. 9, 73–78.https://doi.org/10.1002/cvde.200390005.
Holland, J.H., 1992. Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems: an Introductory
Analysis with Applications to Biology, Control, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. MIT
Press.
Hostrup, M., Harper, P.M., Gani, R., 1999. Design of environmentally benign
processes: integration of solvent design and separation process synthesis.
Comput. Chem. Eng. 23, 1395–1414.
Huang, L., Han, Bo, Han, Bing, Derecskei-Kovacs, A., Xiao, M., Lei, X., O’Neill, M.L.,
Pearlstein, R.M., Chandra, H., Cheng, H., 2014. Density functional theory study
on the full ALD process of silicon nitride thin ﬁlm deposition via BDEAS or
BTBAS and NH3. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 16, 18501–18512.https://doi.org/
10.1039/c4cp02741h.
Huang, S., 2017. Improving Polymethyl Methacrylate Resin Using Novel Nano-
Ceramic Coating. Master dissertation, University of Illinois at Chicago.
Hwang, C.S., 2014. Atomic layer deposition for semiconductors. Atomic Layer
Deposition for Semiconductors.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-8054-9.
Jin, C., Liu, B., Lei, Z., Sun, J., 2015. Structure and photoluminescence of the TiO2 ﬁlms
grown by atomic layer deposition using tetrakis-dimethylamino titanium and
ozone. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 10, 1–9.https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-015-0790-
x.
Johnson, R.W., Hultqvist, A., Bent, S.F., 2014. A brief review of atomic layer
deposition: from fundamentals to applications. Mater. Today 17, 236–246.
Karunanithi, A.T., Achenie, L.E.K., Gani, R., 2006. A computer-aided molecular design
framework for crystallization solvent design. Chem. Eng. Sci. 61, 1247–1260.
Katamreddy, R., Omarjee, V., Feist, B., Dussarrat, C., 2008. Ti source precursors for
atomic layer deposition of TiO2, STO and BST. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 16,
113–122. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2979986.
Katamreddy, R., Wang, Z., Omarjee, V., Rao, P.V., Dussarrat, C., Blasco, N., 2009.
Advanced precursor development for Sr and Ti based oxide thin ﬁlm
applications. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 25, 217–230. https://doi.org/
10.1149/1.3205057.
Khalifa, M., Lue, L., 2017. Fluid phase equilibria a group contribution method for
predicting the solubility of mercury. Fluid Phase Equilib. 432, 76–84.https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ﬂuid.2016.10.025.
Kim, H., 2003. Atomic layer deposition of metal and nitride thin ﬁlms: Current
research efforts and applications for semiconductor device processing. J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct. Process. Meas. Phenom. 21, 2231–
2261.
Kim, K.-J., Diwekar, U.M., 2002. Efﬁcient combinatorial optimization under
uncertainty. 2. Application to stochastic solvent selection. Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 41, 1285–1296.
Kim, K.-J., Diwekar, U.M., Tomazi, K.G., 2004. Entrainer selection and solvent
recycling in complex batch distillation. Chem. Eng. Commun. 191, 1606–1633.
Kim, Y., Kim, D., 2012. Atomic layer deposition of TiO 2 from tetrakis-
dimethylamido-titanium and ozone. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 29, 969–973.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-012-0072-6.
Kirkpatrick, S., Gelatt, C.D., Vecchi, M.P., 1983. Optimization by simulated annealing.
Science (80-.) 220, 671–680.
Kragh, K.C., Kueltzo, A., Jursich, G., Singh, M., Tao, Q., Takoudis, C.G., 2008. Atomic
layer deposition of hafnium oxide on silicon and polymer ﬁbers at temperatures
below 100◦C. J. Undergrad. Res. Sch. Excell. 1, 2–5.
Lee, S.W., Han, J.H., Kim, S.K., Han, S., Lee, W., Hwang, C.S., 2011. Role of interfacial
reaction in atomic layer deposition of TiO2 thin ﬁlms using Ti(OiPr)2(tmhd)2 on
Ru or RuO2 substrates. Chem. Mater. 23, 976–983. https://doi.org/10.1021/
cm1026128.
Leem, J., Park, I., Li, Y., Zhou, W., Jin, Z., Shin, S., Min, Y.S., 2014. Role of HCl in atomic
layer deposition of TiO2 thin ﬁlms from titanium tetrachloride and water. Bull.
Korean Chem. Soc. 35, 1195–1201. https://doi.org/10.5012/
bkcs.2014.35.4.1195.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
16

Leskelä, M., Ritala, M., 2002. Atomic layer deposition (ALD): from precursors to thin
ﬁlm structures. Thin Solid Films 409, 138–146.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-
6090(02)00117-7.
Lin, B., Chavali, S., Camarda, K., Miller, D.C., 2005. Computer-aided molecular design
using Tabu search. Comput. Chem. Eng. 29, 337–347.
Liu, X., Ramanathan, S., Longdergan, A., Srivastava, A., Lee, E., Seidel, T.E., Barton, J.T.,
Pang, D., Gordon, R.G., 2005. ALD of Hafnium Oxide Thin Films from Tetrakis
(ethylmethylamino)hafnium and Ozone. J. Electrochem. Soc. 152, G213.https://
doi.org/10.1149/1.1859631.
Majumder, P., Katamreddy, R., Takoudis, C., 2007. Effect of ﬁlm thickness on the
breakdown temperature of atomic layer deposited ultrathin HfO2 and Al2O3
diffusion barriers in copper metallization. J. Cryst. Growth 309, 12–17.
Marcoulaki, E.C., Kokossis, A.C., 2000. On the development of novel chemicals using
a systematic optimisation approach. Part II. Solvent design. Chem. Eng. Sci. 55,
2547–2561.
Matzdorf, C., Kane, M., Green, J., 2002. Corrosion resistant coatings for aluminum
and aluminum alloys
Mukherjee, R., Gebreslassie, B., Diwekar, U.M., 2017. Design of novel polymeric
adsorbents for metal ion removal from water using computer-aided molecular
design. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy 19, 483–499. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10098-016-1236-6.
Odele, O., Macchietto, S., 1993. Computer aided molecular design: a novel method
for optimal solvent selection. Fluid Phase Equilib. 82, 47–54.
Park, H., Kim, B., Lee, S.H., Kim, H., 2016. Study of a vanadium precursor for VO2
thin-ﬁlm growth in the atomic layer deposition process by multiscale
simulations. J. Phys. Chem. C 120, 28193–28203.https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jpcc.6b06347.
Pistikopoulos, E.N., Stefanis, S.K., 1998. Optimal solvent design for environmental
impact minimization. Comput. Chem. Eng. 22, 717–733.
Pore, V., Rahtu, A., Leskelä, M., Ritala, M., Sajavaara, T., Keinonen, J., 2004. Atomic
layer deposition of photocatalytic TiO2 thin ﬁlms from titanium tetramethoxide
and water. Chem. Vap. Depos. 10, 143–148. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cvde.200306289.
Puurunen, R.L., 2003a. Growth per cycle in atomic layer deposition: Real application
examples of a theoretical model. Chem. Vap. Depos. 9, 327–332.https://doi.org/
10.1002/cvde.200306266.
Puurunen, R.L., 2003b. Growth per cycle in atomic layer deposition: A theoretical
model. Chem. Vap. Depos. 9, 249–257. https://doi.org/10.1002/
cvde.200306265.
Ritala, M., Leskelä, M., Niinistö, L., Prohaska, T., Friedbacher, G., Grasserbauer, M.,
1994a. Surface roughness reduction in atomic layer epitaxy growth of titanium
dioxide thin ﬁlms. Thin Solid Films 249, 155–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0040-6090(94)90754-4.
Ritala, M., Leskelä, M., Nykänen, E., Soininen, P., Niinistö, L., 1993. Growth of
titanium dioxide thin ﬁlms by atomic layer epitaxy. Thin Solid Films 225, 288–
295.
Ritala, Mikko, Leskelä, M., Rauhala, E., 1994b. Atomic layer epitaxy growth of
titanium dioxide thin ﬁlms from titanium ethoxide. Chem. Mater. 6, 556–561.
https://doi.org/10.1021/cm00040a035.
Rushworth, S.A., Nickson, R., Hughes, P., 2005. Vapour pressure measurement of low
volatility precursors 45, 1000–1002. 10.1016/j.microrel.2004.11.007
Salazar, J., Diwekar, U.M., Joback, K., Berger, A.H., Bhown, A.S., 2013. Solvent
selection for post-combustion CO2 capture. Energy Procedia 37, 257–264.
Samudra, A.P., Sahinidis, N.V., 2013. Optimization-based framework for computer-
aided molecular design. AIChE J. 59, 3686–3701.
Schlüter, M., Egea, J.A., Banga, J.R., 2009. Extended ant colony optimization for non-
convex mixed integer nonlinear programming. Comput. Oper. Res. 36, 2217–
2229.
Schlüter, M., Gerdts, M., 2010. The oracle penalty method. J. Glob. Optim. 47, 293–
325.
Selvaraj, S.K., Jursich, G., Takoudis, C.G., 2013. Design and implementation of a novel
portable atomic layer deposition/chemical vapor deposition hybrid reactor. Rev.
Sci. Instrum. 84, 95109.
Shahmohammadi, M., Pensa, E., Bhatia, H., Yang, B., Jursich, G., Takoudis, C.G.,
2020a. Enhancing the surface properties and functionalization of polymethyl
methacrylate with atomic layer-deposited titanium(IV) oxide. J. Mater. Sci. 55,
17151–17169. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-020-05274-2.
Shahmohammadi, M., Yang, B., Takoudis, C.G., 2020b. Applications of titania atomic
layer deposition in the biomedical ﬁeld and recent updates. Am. J. Biomed. Sci.
Res. 8, 465–468.https://doi.org/10.34297/AJBSR.2020.08.001321.
Sinha, M., Achenie, L.E.K., 2001. Systematic design of blanket wash solvents with
recovery considerations. Adv. Environ. Res. 5, 239–249.
Trevizo, C., Daniel, D., Nirmalakhandan, N., 2000. Screening alternative
degreasing solvents using multivariate analysis. Environ. Sci. Technol. 34,
2587–2595.
Vogt, J., Alvarez, S., 2014. Van der Waals Radii of noble gases. Inorg. Chem. 53, 9260–
9266. https://doi.org/10.1021/ic501364h.
Weon Hwang, G., Ju Lee, H., Lee, K., Seong Hwang, C., 2007. Atomic layer deposition
and electrical properties of PbTiO3 thin ﬁlms using metallorganic precursors and
H2O. J. Electrochem. Soc. 154, G69–G76.https://doi.org/10.1149/1.2431317.
Xie, Q., Jiang, Y.-L., Detavernier, C., Deduytsche, D., Van Meirhaeghe, R.L., Ru, G.-P.,
Li, B.-Z., Qu, X.-P., 2007. Atomic layer deposition of TiO2 from tetrakis-dimethyl-
amido titanium or Ti isopropoxide precursors and H2O. J. Appl. Phys. 102,.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2798384 083521.
Xu, R., 2013. Atomic Layer Deposited Thin Films for Dielectrics, Semiconductor
Passivation, and Solid Oxide Fuel Cells Ph.D. dissertation. University of Illinois at
Chicago.
Xu, R., Tao, Q., Yang, Y., Takoudis, C.G., 2012. Atomic layer deposition and
characterization of stoichiometric erbium oxide thin dielectrics on Si (100)
using (CpMe)3Er precursor and ozone. Appl. Surf. Sci. 258, 8514–8520.
Xu, W., Diwekar, U.M., 2007. Multi-objective integrated solvent selection and
solvent recycling under uncertainty using a new genetic algorithm. Int. J.
Environ. Pollut. 29, 70–89.
Xu, W., Diwekar, U.M., 2005. Environmentally friendly heterogeneous azeotropic
distillation system design: Integration of EBS selection and IPS recycling. Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res. 44, 4061–4067.
Xu, Y., Musgrave, C.B., 2004. A DFT study of the Al2O3 atomic layer deposition on
SAMs: Effect of SAM termination. Chem. Mater. 16, 646–653.https://doi.org/
10.1021/cm035009p.
Yamamoto, H., Tochigi, K., 2008. Computer-aided molecular design to select
foaming agents using a neural network method. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 47,
5152–5156.
M. Shahmohammadi, R. Mukherjee, C.G. Takoudis et al. Chemical Engineering Science 234 (2021) 116416
17