Atomistic Kinetic Monte Carlo Study of Atomic Layer
Deposition Derived from Density Functional Theory
Mahdi Shirazi and Simon D. Elliott*
To describe the atomic layer deposition (ALD) reactions of
HfO2 from Hf(N(CH 3)2)4 and H 2O, a three-dimensional on-lattice
kinetic Monte-Carlo model is developed. In this model, all
atomistic reaction pathways in density functional theory (DFT)
are implemented as reaction events on the lattice. This con-
tains all steps, from the early stage of adsorption of each ALD
precursor, kinetics of the surface protons, interaction between
the remaining precursors (steric effect), influence of remaining
fragments on adsorption sites (blocking), densification of each
ALD precursor, migration of each ALD precursors, and cooper-
ation between the remaining precursors to adsorb H2O (coop-
erative effect). The essential chemistry of the ALD reactions
depends on the local environment at the surface. The coordi-
nation number and a neighbor list are used to implement the
dependencies. The validity and necessity of the proposed reac-
tion pathways are statistically established at the mesoscale.
The formation of one monolayer of precursor fragments is
shown at the end of the metal pulse. Adsorption and dissocia-
tion of the H 2O precursor onto that layer is described, leading
to the delivery of oxygen and protons to the surface during
the H 2O pulse. Through these processes, the remaining precur-
sor fragments desorb from the surface, leaving the surface
with bulk-like and OH-terminated HfO2, ready for the next
cycle. The migration of the low coordinated remaining precur-
sor fragments is also proposed. This process introduces a slow
reordering motion (crawling) at the mesoscale, leading to
the smooth and conformal thin film that is characteristic of
ALD. VC 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI: 10.1002/jcc.23491
Introduction
Thin film materials, with thicknesses of the order of 1–100 nm,
have a wide variety of technological applications. For their use in
microelectronics, thin films must exhibit a high level of confor-
mality, uniform stoichiometry, and controlled thickness. Atomic
layer deposition (ALD) is an emerging low-temperature deposi-
tion technique providing relatively accurate control of composi-
tion and good conformality over high-aspect-ratio structures. [1,2]
The films are capable of being used in nonplanar structures such
as three-dimensional (3D) transistors. Use of thin film materials in
the food packaging and pharmaceutical industry allow consider-
able savings in raw materials.[3] In addition, they can improve the
humidity tolerance and performance of polymers. Developing
new ALD processes require better understanding of how film
growth depends on the chemicals being used.
ALD is a variant of chemical vapor deposition (CVD), in
which two or more gaseous precursors are allowed to flow
separately into a reactor in alternate pulses. Inert gas is admit-
ted between each pulse to purge the remaining precursor
from the reactor and avoid gas-phase reactions. Because of
this, the precursors react with the substrate only. In the ideal
case, ALD surface reactions are self-limiting, meaning that
reactions cease after the formation of one monolayer of pre-
cursor fragments at the end of the pulse. Growth of the prod-
uct film, therefore, takes place at the level of a submonolayer
in each cycle, conformally coating all exposed surfaces if the
dose in each pulse is sufficient.
The surface chemistry of ALD has not been fully investi-
gated either experimentally or computationally, even for
popular systems such as HfO 2 and ZrO 2. Different ALD precur-
sors and processing conditions are observed experimentally to
give different film properties [4] (e.g., morphology, conformality,
thickness) and our assumption is that this is largely due to dif-
ferences in the reaction pathways at the atomic scale accumu-
lating over thousands of reaction events. A realistic ALD
growth mechanism is extremely intricate and may consist of
standard ALD acid/base reactions, structural relaxation, CVD-
like reactions, and of influential factors such as steric hin-
drance, coreagent population, and the cooperative effects that
we introduce in this article. The dependence of these mecha-
nisms on temperature, the partial pressure of the precursor,
pulse and purge times determines the measured process
parameters such as ALD growth rate and film properties.
Modeling a complete ALD process requires integration of
three modeling scales: a model for the reactive flow of the
vapor-phase species on the scale of the whole reactor and
within microscopic features, [5] a model for the evolution of the
atomic structure at the growth surface, and a model for
the reaction kinetics in both the vapor and at the surface. The
overall ALD growth dynamics across all three scales is too
complicated to be fully modeled. This article describes the
M. Shirazi S. D. Elliott
Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Lee Maltings, Cork, Ireland
E-mail: simon.elliott@tyndall.ie
Contract grant sponsor: Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) [Functional
Oxides and Related Materials for Electronics (FORME), www.tyndall.ie/
forme]
VC 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
244 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG


reaction kinetics and structural relaxation at the growing sur-
face, ignoring fluid dynamics and pressure fluctuations at
either the feature or reactor scale. The information used in this
model is obtained from an electronic structure model. [6] Before
we describe our model in detail, we will briefly survey the
existing literature on similar ALD models.
A simple analytical model, based on the mass balance of
chemisorption, relates the growth rate to the size of the reac-
tant and the chemisorption events.[7,8] Steric hindrance of the
ligands controls the saturation of chemisorption at the adsorp-
tion sites. This model can be used for various ALD systems [9] if
the mechanism is known. Although it can estimate growth
rates, it does not give insights into the fundamental surface
chemistry or predict properties such as the morphology of the
film.
Another approach is to perform all-atom molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations using an empirical interatomic potential. This
technique has been used to model the growth of Al2O3 from
Al(CH3)3 and H 2O.[10] Experimental results [11] show that ALD
using this system is possible at low temperatures and, therefore,
a relatively low activation energy for the gaseous by-product
methane is expected. Hence, applying the interatomic potential
for the amorphous alumina surface seems to be a well-suited
approach to describing the structural relaxation during ALD
growth. However, using MD simulation is unsuitable for ALD
systems whose primary reactions fall into the category of the
rare event.[12] Also, experimentally measured O/Al ratios vary
between 1.34 and 1.70 depending on growth temperature. [11]
In this situation, due to the process of densification, which is a
driving force for the ALD reactions, [6] the Al atoms should exist
at higher coordination number (c.n.) (i.e., c.n. 55o r6 )t h a nt h e
calculated value (c.n. 53 or 4). Therefore, a denser film than
that actually obtained would be expected and the interatomic
potential does not adequately describe the structural relaxation
taking place during ALD growth.
Another approach is kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC), [13] a power-
ful method for describing the stochastic time evolution of
interdependent events. KMC is used in a wide range of areas
from chemistry to biology. In KMC modeling, the true dynami-
cal information (atomic positions and momenta) is dismissed
and the atomic trajectories are replaced by a set of discrete
positions, chosen from a set of predetermined possible atomic
sites. KMC is ideally suited for modeling reaction events in sur-
face science, involving adsorption, desorption, cooperative
reaction, and structural relaxation at the surface of the grow-
ing film. [14,15] The method can reach simulation times of orders
of magnitude longer than ab initio MD, while preserving a
level of atomic detail. KMC can accommodate events at differ-
ent time scales, including rare events. There are many KMC
approaches, from coarse-grained model systems with hypo-
thetical input values, to realistic atomic simulation with accu-
rate chemical kinetics for the making and breaking of bonds.
In the latter, a proper evaluation of surface kinetics at the
mesoscopic scale is possible by using accurate information
from first principles the electronic-structure calculations.
Neizvestny et al. [16] used KMC as a coarse-grained model to
simulate the ALD process. To reproduce the experimental
situation, hypothetical activation energies were used. However,
the idea of KMC approach that we follow here is to carry the
accuracy of electronic structure calculation theories to the
mesoscopic scale. Along these lines a ground-breaking KMC
model for ALD was proposed by Dkhissi et al. [17] that consid-
ered the ALD reactions and activation energies from density
functional theory (DFT) calculations. They used a complicated
lattice-based KMC to describe the growth of HfO 2 from HfCl 4
and H 2O on Si. A lattice framework was used to describe the
transition between silicon crystal substrate and the oxide thin
film. However, the complexity of the densification process on
the growing surface was not implemented, insofar as changes
in Hf and O c.n. from the gas to solid phase [6] and associated
structural relaxation, was not considered. The steric demand of
the precursor fragments was only partially accounted for.
As a general rule, an accurate description of a system by
KMC requires a complete set of reaction pathways because
the absence of an important reaction pathway results in a
poor description. As will be shown in this study, the absence
of cooperation between the remaining ligands to adsorb H 2O
molecules[6] (which we term the cooperative effect) result in
overestimation of the growth rate. In this study, multiple pro-
ton diffusion, steric effects, structural relaxation, and coopera-
tive effects are included for the first time in ALD growth
simulation and the necessity of including these in the meso-
scale chemistry is justified.
Another major concern with the input data to the model is
the accuracy of activation energies, which affects the growth
rate and time evolution. The chemistry presented here has
been obtained byab initio calculations using DFT. [6] There is a
systematic error due to the approximate DFT exchange-
correlation functional that often results in underestimated acti-
vation energies for breaking and making bonds. This can in
principle be overcome by using more accurate methods [18,19]
rather than DFT. However, owing to the complicated reaction
pathways that result from cooperative effects, computing large
cells with many atoms (e.g., 500 atoms) is necessary, which is
too computationally demanding for the more accurate meth-
ods. Hence, at the present time, we rely on the activation
energies calculated using DFT. If all activation energies are
underestimated, then the time taken to saturation during ALD
will be too short, but the sequence of reactions will be
correct.
The chemical reactions that can occur at a given site
depend not only on the chemical identity of that site but also
on the spatial environment-both local bonding to adjacent
atoms (described via the c.n.) and steric effects due to more
distant species. Hence, to implement the surface chemistry dis-
cussed earlier, a lattice-based KMC is used and the spatial envi-
ronment is described through the c.n. and a neighbor list.
Clearly, a lattice-based KMC does not explain the morphology
of the film during ALD (e.g., crystalline vs. amorphous). In this
study, we present only on-lattice KMC. However, the morphol-
ogy of the film as a function of temperature could be studied
by off-lattice KMC. [20] This means that the reported ALD reac-
tions and their activation energies could be used for future
off-lattice studies.
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 245
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


In the next section, some background of KMC simulations is
described. However, the main part of this article is explaining
how DFT-derived reaction pathways were implemented into
lattice-KMC (Reaction Events section) and then evaluating how
that played out as surface intermediates and growth behavior
(Results and Discussion section).
Computational Detail
Transition-state theory
The common approach to modeling chemical kinetics is using
transition-state theory (TST). In TST, the rate constant for the
transition from a minimum A to a minimum B is estimated
from the equilibrium flux crossing a dividing surface separat-
ing the two minima. The dividing surface is the hyperplane
perpendicular to the reaction coordinate and the transition
state (TS) is where the two intersect. Here, there are two
assumptions. First, it is supposed that the system has reached
thermal equilibrium between A and TS. Second, it is assumed
that successful transitions through the dividing surface from A
to B are uncorrelated, meaning that each forward transition
through the dividing surface moves the system from A to B.
For these assumptions to be valid, the best choice of dividing
surface is near the saddle point in the minimum energy path
between A and B, where the entire equilibrium flux is mini-
mized. If thermal motion around the saddle point and the
minima can be described by second-order expansions (har-
monic vibrational modes) then the transition between the two
minima can be explained by harmonic TST (hTST). From these
assumptions, the rate constant kAB for the transition from min-
imum A to minimum B can be derived from the Markovian
state-to-state dynamics equation:
kTST
AB ðTÞ5A exp ðEa=kBTÞ (1)
where Ea is activation energy and the prefactor is determined
from
A5f TST
AB ðTÞðkBT=hÞ (2)
where h is Planck’s constant, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is
temperature and where
f TST
AB ðTÞ5ðqvib
TS =qvib
A Þ (3)
where qvib
TS and qvib
A are the vibrational partition functions at
the TS and at the bound state A, respectively.
Thus, to evaluate kTST
AB , static information about the potential
energy surface (PES) at the initial minimum A and at the TS
and the partition functions at those locations are typically
required. In most cases involving surface-bound reactants and
products, the vibrational properties of the system at the mini-
mum and TS are found to be similar. Internal rotational com-
ponents of species at the surface have a tiny influence on the
vibrational partition function. This inaccuracy in prefactor is
negligible in comparison with inaccuracy of activation energy
in exponential factor. Hence, we consider the ratio f TST
AB ðTÞ/C24 1,
eq. (3). However, gas-surface reactions include large changes
in entropy and so this assumption does not apply. The prefac-
tor has values of the order of 1012–1013 s21 depending on
temperature. In hTST, the key information from the PES which
is entered into eq. (1) is Ea, the potential energy of the TS rela-
tive to the (meta)stable initial minimum. In ALD, many TSs cor-
respond to situations where bonds are made or broken. Ea for
such situations can be obtained from ab initio quantum chem-
istry models. These models, in the Born–Oppenheimer presen-
tation, treat electrons adiabatically at every configuration of
atomic positions and atomic dynamics take place on the
resulting PES.
However, hTST certainly cannot be used for the adsorption
process (A 5gas-phase, B 5adsorbate on surface). Adsorption
of the precursor takes place with a probability given by Max-
well–Boltzmann statistics. The molecular flux or impingement
rate to the adsorption sites is obtained from
kads
n;B ðT; PnÞ5Sn;BðTÞPnAucﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ2pmnkBTp (4)
where Sn;BðTÞ is the sticking coefficient that quantifies the frac-
tion of molecules that stick to an adsorption site (for simplicity,
it was assumed that Sn;B51). Pn and mn are the partial pres-
sure and the mass of precursor molecules, respectively. Auc is
the area of the surface unit-cell including site B and n is a
label for different precursor. [15,21] In this study, the desorption
rates are described using eq. (1), because the activation ener-
gies for desorption can be calculated by the nudged elastic
band (NEB) method.
Time evolution
A KMC simulation consists of a sequence of separate hops
from one minimum to another (known as “events”) taking
place at sites within the simulation cell. The random choice of
which event at which location after which amount of time is
governed by KMC. Starting from a given minimum, the KMC
algorithm determines which minimum to hop to and the
appropriate time step Dt, therefore, changes at each KMC iter-
ation. The system clock is advanced by this time:
t5t1Dt (5)
Each pathway, therefore, has its own probability (Poisson)
distribution function for time evolution. The probability of
event m consisting of hopping from minimum i to minimum j
at a given site is given by eq. (6):
pmðDtÞ5kij exp ð2kijDtÞ (6)
The system has many possible events each with a fixed
probability that is obtained its rate constant kij using eq. (1).
To advance the dynamics of the system in time, many numeri-
cal KMC algorithms have been suggested in the literature. [13]
The first-reaction method [22] uses eq. (7) to determine the
timestep for each possible event.
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
246 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Dtm5ln ðqmÞ
km
(7)
where m 51,...,N. This algorithm has been used for ALD
modeling.[17,23]
A random number qm 2/C138 0; 1/C138 for each of the N possible
events is generated, so that the timesteps are properly
weighted by the rate constants. The pathway with the shortest
timestep is chosen and executed. The system moves to the
new state (minimum), and the system clock is advanced by
the corresponding shortest timestep. In this algorithm, many
random numbers must be generated, all of which are dis-
carded apart from one.
Another commonly used algorithm was proposed by Bortz,
Kalos and Lebowitz (BKL) [24] and is also referred as the Gilles-
pie, N-fold way, or residence-time algorithm. Initially, the BKL
algorithm as with any KMC algorithm, begins by finding all N
possible pathways across all the sites in the simulation cell.
The corresponding N different rate constants are obtained
using eq. (1). The algorithm accumulates all the possible
events together with their associated rates into an event list.
Then, the total rate constant is obtained by summing all the
individual rate constants:
ktot 5
XN
m51
km (8)
Then, in contrast to the first-reaction method, only two ran-
dom numbers q1 and q2 2/C138 0; 1/C138 are generated. When N is
large, generating and processing two random numbers instead
ofN random numbers makes a large computational difference.
Hence, the first-reaction method is not as computationally effi-
cient as the BKL method. q1 is used to select one of the possi-
ble events via eq. (9). Obviously, an event with a large rate
constant is more likely to occur. Therefore, the algorithm
searches for the event q in the event list that fulfills eq. (9).
and the event q is executed.
Xq21
i51
ki /C20 q1ktot /C20
Xq
i51
ki (9)
An update of the event list is needed after each execution
of an event. Even if the system includes thousands of potential
events, typically only a few events are removed and a few
events are added (in the order of 1–10) to the event list after
each execution. It is most efficient to preserve the event list
and simply modify the executed event and affected events in
the vicinity of that site. Therefore, reinitialization of all possible
events in each iteration is not required, an enormous compu-
tational saving. In fact, updates of the event list have a much
higher impact on the computational cost than generating the
random numbers. In this respect, the first reaction method
and BKL algorithm perform similarly well.
The other important aspect of the BKL algorithm is the time
step and how the system clock is advanced. By executing the
chosen event, the system moves to the new state and the sys-
tem clock is advanced by the equation below:
t5t2lnðq2Þ
ktot
(10)
where q2 is the second random number. The time evolution is
independent of the chosen event, but does depend on the
total sumktot . This means that when high rate events (fast
processes) become dominant—not only in terms of weight
but also in terms of number—the simulation advances
extremely slowly. Such disparity between low and high rate
events occurs when the system is trapped in a set of adjacent
minima (a “superbasin”). In this situation, a more advanced
model[25] is needed that reduces the occurrence of frequent
events. Our KMC model is also faced with the problem of this
disparity (see subsection Proton diffusion).
Some of the events observed during ab initio MD are highly
exothermic and barrierless or have a small barrier (less than
0.2 eV) and so may be thought of as deterministic, rather than
stochastic. To implement these processes in the stochastic
model, a small barrier (0.2 eV) is assigned to each of the deter-
ministic processes. The definition of a small barrier can be
problematic because it can create a disparity in the rate of
reactions and disturb the time evolution of the system. How-
ever, the reverse of these deterministic process is extremely
rare and, therefore, the reverse reaction is omitted from our
event list.
A larger system typically means more events. More events
in the total event list means that the sum ktot in the BKL
approach becomes larger, even though the same reaction list
is used. Hence, the system clock progresses slower for a large
system than for small one, which is physically correct. How-
ever, to achieve a realistic cycle time for an ALD process with
a reasonable computational time, some fast processes are
ignored.
The system size and the fast processes, therefore, largely
dictate the progress of the simulation time. In order to tackle
a realistic ALD system, many reactions have to be included
(see Reaction Events section).
KMC solver
The ALD application was developed as a new feature in the
stochastic parallel particle kinetic simulator (SPPARKS) [26,27]
code. SPPARKS is written in a modular fashion, allowing new
functionality to be added in a straightforward manner. All pos-
sible events are specified before the simulation begins. The
event list consists of all possible events at each site. Rejection
KMC is chosen as the KMC solver for choosing an event from
the event list. This KMC solver uses the previously defined
BKL-algorithm[24] to update the system clock by eq. (10). The
solver executes the chosen event and modifies the occupation
of sites. The event list is updated by removing events that
have become invalid at modified sites and adding new events
for these sites to the event list.
Lattice site
To track the surface evolution and film morphology, a lattice-
based KMC method is used. The lattice can in principle be two
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 247
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


dimensional (2D) or 3D. Tracking in three dimensions is much
more difficult than in two dimensions due to the far greater
topological complexity. However, to accurately translate the
chemistry in the atomic scale to the mesoscale for ALD, 3D
tracking is deemed necessary. The capability to describe the
system in 3D makes modern KMC a powerful tool to explain
both reaction kinetics and film morphology. The two precur-
sors considered in this study are Hf(N(CH 3)2)4 and H 2O. In this
article, the ligand N(CH 3)2 is referred to as X for simplicity.
The lattice sites are defined based on monoclinic HfO 2
(space group P2 1/c)[28] as this is the most stable crystalline
structure of the oxide after deposition and annealing. The 3D
lattice sites are occupied by either Hf or O atoms during the
ALD simulation. In the monoclinic structure, every site of the
cation sublattice is surrounded by seven anion sites and every
site of the anion sublattice is surrounded by three or four cat-
ion sites (Fig. 1). Based on the counted number of first neigh-
bor atoms of a cation or anion, the c.n. was defined. Every
cation or anion site can have a c.n. ranging from 0 up to 7 or
4, respectively. We exclude bonds to H when quoting the c.n.
of O.
The crystallographic directions h111i define the x,y, and z
axes of the coordinate system. Periodicity is imposed in x and
y but not in z. Two smooth layers of fixed oxygen and
hydroxyl in the x-y plane are considered as the substrate in
this example. The first cycle starts with a HfX 4 pulse. The crys-
tal growth is then in the 1z direction. Each lattice site is asso-
ciated with three variables describing the state of this site.
– The first variable contains the information regarding the
chemical identity of the site. This variable is updated fre-
quently during the KMC simulation.
– Each lattice site also has a neighbor list that carries the
information about the local bonding. Local bonding indicates
which site is connected to which site and this assists in
defining the reaction events in KMC. Structural relaxation,
cooperative reactions, and steric hindrance are implemented
using the neighbor list.
– Finally, each lattice site is associated with a discrete vari-
able describing the c.n. of the site. This variable, together with
the neighbor list, allows us to implement the complicated
chemistry at the surface. For instance, by densification of the
hafnium atom of the precursor to the surface, the c.n. of a cat-
ion site can change from 0 to a limit of 3–8.
Pulse time and purge time
In the ALD process, gaseous precursors are admitted to the
reactor in alternate pulses separated by periods of purging. To
implement this in KMC, the respective adsorption reactions are
turned on and off as simulation time advances. Adsorption
reactions occur alternately as time progresses.
Reaction Events
Event type
In our KMC model, reaction events are defined and used to
implement the chemistry of ALD obtained from DFT calcula-
tions.[6] For every position, geometry optimization was carried
out by DFT calculations. The minima obtained from the DFT
calculations are mapped onto the lattice sites for the subse-
quent KMC calculations. The events taking place within the
KMC calculation modify the chemical occupation of the sites.
This corresponds to the transition of the system from one min-
imum to another in the DFT calculation. The frequency of an
event is derived using eq. (1) from an activation energy
obtained from NEB[29] calculation with DFT.
We consider that three types of events occur, each with dif-
ferent dependencies on neighbors. Here, the site under
Figure 1. (A) DFT optimized surface structure of hydroxylated HfO 2.[6] Terminal hydroxyl group (a), terminal adsorbed water (b), bridging hydroxyl (c), three
coordinated oxygen (d), four coordinated oxygen (e), and seven coordinated hafnium (f ) are highlighted. (Red 5O, White 5H, large grey 5Hf ). (B) Sche-
matic 2D diagram illustrating mapping of the same surface structure. Blue and red boxes show the cation and anion sites, respectively. The dashed line s
show the connection between sites in this 2D diagram but the actual c.n. in three dimensions is also given.
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
248 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


consideration is specified by wð0Þ. The first and second neigh-
bors of the involved site are identified by wð1Þ and wð2Þ,
respectively. The occupation of the first or second neighbor
site may also change as a result of an event at wð0Þ.
Type a. This type of event only changes the occupation of a
single site. The event is dependent on the c.n. at that site and
on the pulse/purge stage of the ALD cycle. For instance, OH (0)
! OH-HfX4
(0) only occurs for the hydroxyl group with a c.n. of
oxygen 51 (excluding H) during the hafnium precursor pulse.
The possibility of adsorption, therefore, is limited to the anion
site with OH occupation during the metal pulse.
Type b. This event modifies the occupation of a site wð0Þ and
the second neighbor of this site wð2Þ. Clearly, the possibility of
this event occurring depends on the characteristics of the site
and on those of its second neighbor. As with typea, events,
there can be a dependence on the c.n. and on the pulse/
purge stage of the ALD cycle. For example, consider an
adsorbate site as an anion site occupied with adsorbed HfX4,
whose first and second neighbors are cation and anion sites,
respectively. Then, the event [OH-HfX 4](0) 1OH(2) ! [OH-
Hf(HX)X3](0) 1O(2) only occurs when there is a proton OH (2) in
the second neighbor of the adsorbate site.
Type c. This event type changes the occupation of a site and
of its first neighbor. For instance, [OH-HfX 2](0) 1VAC(1) !
OH(0) 1HfX2(1) shows the motion of a hafnium precursor frag-
ment to an adjacent vacant cation site. In this case, the event
changes the occupation of the adsorbate sitewð0Þ (anion sub-
lattice) and the vacancy site wð1Þ (cation sublattice). Following
an event of this type, the c.n.’s of both adsorbate and vacancy
sites must be updated.
In the following discussion, the atomic-scale chemistry of
the surface determined [6] from DFT is translated into discrete
events in order to describe the KMC simulation in more detail.
Hf precursor adsorption
Molecular HfX 4 chemisorption takes place with a probability
given by eq. (4). There are three criteria that adsorption sites
of HfX 4 must satisfy as outlined below.
– First, DFT calculations [6] have shown that the adsorption
sites are singly coordinated oxygen and hydroxyl groups
(wð0Þ 5O or OH with c.n. 51). In other words, the bridging
oxygen and crystalline oxygen with c.n. >1 are unsuitable for
adsorption.
– Second, the adsorption sites can be blocked due to the
remaining X at neighboring sites. There are different rules for
remaining ligands of HfX 4, HfX 3, HfX 2, and HfX as discussed in
subsection Steric effect.
– Third, the adsorption sites can be blocked due to O at
neighboring sites. As anion sites are occupied by oxygen dur-
ing the oxygen pulse, low coordinated O or OH (c.n51) in
the sublayers become inaccessible to the precursor metal. To
prevent the adsorption at these sites, the number of oxygen
atoms occupying second neighbors of the relevant oxygen
site are counted. If this number is greater than 4/5 of the total
sites, then the relevant site is blocked. This process only hap-
pens during the Hf pulse.
If all sites are occupied or blocked, the incident hafnium
precursors are assumed to be reflected back to the gas phase.
HfX4 desorption
The reverse of HfX 4 adsorption is desorption. As with adsorp-
tion, the desorption event is of type a. Neighboring sites are
unblocked via desorption of HfX 4. In our KMC calculation,
desorption of charged precursor fragments like [HfX 3]1 or
intermediates like [Hf(HX)X 3]1 is not allowed.
Proton diffusion
In our KMC model, various types of proton diffusion are
defined. There is a strong correlation between these diffusion
events and other reactions. For example, the ready availability
of protons contributes to the facile elimination of ligands.
Increased eliminations during the metal pulse lead to a higher
rate of growth. [30] As one of the aims of this model is to judge
exactly how the rate of growth is affected by these diffusion
events, they are sorted into four types below.
– Proton diffusion from oxygen to oxygen
Proton diffusion from oxygen to oxygen is the reaction that
allows mobility of protons across the surface. The c.n. of oxy-
gen (at an anion site) is used to distinguish between the pro-
ton diffusion barriers. DFT calculations show that it is
energetically favorable for protons to move from high c.n. oxy-
gen to low c.n. oxygen. Hence, under-coordinated oxygen
(with c.n. 51 or 2) are the Br /C239nsted basic sites that are actively
involved in proton diffusion. A one coordinated oxygen is a
hyperactive site. It spontaneously decomposes a neighboring
H2O molecule (type b) or takes a proton from a higher coordi-
nated oxygen (c.n. /C21 2). According to DFT calculations, both
of these reactions are barrierless. A two coordinated oxygen is
less active than a one coordinated oxygen. The two coordi-
nated oxygen faces a large barrier to taking a proton from a
neighboring oxygen (c.n.51). After depletion of protons at
the surface due to desorption as HX, some oxygen atoms
acquire a higher c.n due to densification, whereas the other
oxygen atoms acquire a reduced c.n. and become more
Br/C239nsted basic. These latter under-coordinated oxygen
undergo a form of proton diffusion from oxygen to oxygen
with the same c.n. A 0.75-eV barrier for these one or two coor-
dinated oxygen atoms is obtained by DFT.
– Proton diffusion from oxygen to ligand nitrogen (from
anion to anion site)
The other type of proton diffusion is from the surface oxy-
gen to the nitrogen of the precursor and its reverse. In the
case of alkylamide, [6] it has been shown that there are stable
geometries with a proton bound to the nitrogen. The forma-
tion of HX in this manner is necessary prior to ligand
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 249
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


elimination by desorption of HX. However, the activation
energy strongly depends on the distance between N and O. If
we suppose that HfX4
(0) is anchored to an OH (0) group at the
surface (type a), the most accessible proton for hopping to
the N (0) of the precursor is not the anchor OH (0), but rather
the second neighbor protons (OH (2)), because the N (0)-O(2) dis-
tance is shorter. The activation energies for proton diffusion
from the surface oxygen to the nitrogen of the ligand and its
reverse range from 0.05 to 0.30 eV. To map this proton hop-
ping behavior into KMC, type b events are introduced that
change the occupation of the site and its second neighbor.
In comparison to the barrier to rotation for the protonated
ligand discussed in subsection Rotation of the protonated
ligand, diffusion of the proton from nitrogen back to the oxy-
gen has a lower barrier. This means that proton diffusion
between the surface oxygen and the nitrogen and its reverse
is much faster than rotation of the protonated ligand. The
most likely events which occur are low barrier events. Hence,
the KMC simulation advances extremely slowly, especially con-
sidering that the sum of probabilities is over a large number
of sites, giving a total rate that is enormously large (superba-
sin) (subsection Time evolution). To overcome this difficulty,
we propose that only the presence of a proton on surface oxy-
gen is necessary for protonation and rotation of the ligand. In
other words, we remove (filter) proton diffusion from the sur-
face oxygen to the nitrogen and its reverse from the reaction
list. Otherwise, the realistic ALD time will be inaccessible to
the current KMC simulation. A side-effect of this is that time
evolution of the system does not correspond to the realistic
ALD time.
– Proton diffusion from oxygen to nitrogen (from anion to
cation site)
This diffusion describes proton hopping from oxygen ( wð0Þ)
to the first neighbour nitrogen of the densified precursor
(wð1Þ) which is explained in subsection Densification of HfX 2.
This diffusion occurs from the anion site to the cation site
(typec).
– Proton diffusion from nitrogen to nitrogen
Proton diffusion within the adsorbed precursor consists of
proton hopping from nitrogen near the surface to the top-
most nitrogen of the precursor. This diffusion is of typea.
In this calculation, no particular ligand orientation for proton
diffusion is considered.
Rotation of the protonated ligand
After diffusion of a proton from the surface oxygen to the
ligand nitrogen, there is a second reaction that facilitates elim-
ination of HX, namely rotation of the protonated ligand. Acti-
vation energies of 0.42–0.51 eV are calculated for the rotation
of alkylamide ligand. [6] To implement this reaction in combina-
tion with proton diffusion from the surface oxygen to the
nitrogen, event typeb is used.
Elimination of the ligand
It is commonly assumed that protonated ligands (HX) rapidly
desorb following proton transfer from the surface to the
remaining fragment during ALD. However, we have shown [6]
that further proton transfer to the remaining fragment before
desorption facilitates the ligand elimination. For instance, the
activation energy for desorption of the first HX after the first
protonation and rotation is 0.89 eV. This energy decreases to
0.39 eV after the second protonation. A third protonation
allows spontaneous desorption ( Ea 50 eV) of two HX and den-
sification of the metal precursor. In order to map the desorp-
tion of HX into the KMC model, the occupation of a single site
is modified (type a). Neighboring sites have no direct influence
on the desorption event. The last HX desorption from the Hf
precursor is an endothermic reaction. Such an event takes
place only if either of the following occurs:
– The Hf of the precursor is densified into an empty cation
site surrounded by least six oxygen atoms; conversely, an
empty site in the subsurface layer.
– The c.n. of Hf of the precursor is increased by adsorption
of H 2O during the oxygen pulse, as explained later.
Densification of HfX2
Ab initio MD calculations [6] show that after elimination of two
ligands from the adsorbed HfX 4, the Hf atom of the remaining
HfX2 fragment becomes strongly bonded to nearby under-
coordinated oxygen at the surface. This structural relaxation is
termed “densification” and is implemented in the KMC model
as event typec with a small barrier (0.2 eV). The O-HfX 2
(0) rem-
nant moves from the anion site where it was adsorbed to one
of the neighboring cation sites wð1Þ where the Hf belongs
(Fig. 2). To implement densification in the KMC simulation, the
c.n. of the anion and cation sites involved in densification are
modified. As mentioned above, every site wð0Þ of the anion
sublattice is connected to 2 or 3 cation sites wð1Þ at the sur-
face. To determine which cation site is chosen, a random pro-
cedure is used, which is not strictly correct. The correct
dependence on c.n. is included via the migration process (see
subsection Migration of HfX 2).
Typically hafnium, together with the remaining fragments,
forms three or four bonds to the smooth surface following
densification (Fig. 7). In this case, densification is highly exo-
thermic ( DG /C20 24 eV) and an enormous activation energy is
needed for the reverse reaction. Also, densification into the
sublayers (filling gaps in a rough surface) is expected to be
even more exothermic than on a smooth surface. This means
that a huge amount of energy is needed to detach the haf-
nium (with the remaining precursor) from three or four oxygen
atoms, which is not possible energetically in the ALD process.
Hence, the reversal of densification is neglected in our
calculation.
The hafnium should finally become densified to the cation
site that has highest c.n. to surface oxygen. In other words,
stronger attraction from higher number of Br /C239nsted base sites
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
250 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


is hypothetically applied to the hafnium than less one. For
instance, in Figure 2, the five-coordinated empty site exerts a
stronger attraction to the hafnium than the empty two-
coordinated site. Therefore, the hafnium of the precursor
should densify to the cation site with a higher c.n. rather than
moving randomly. This tendency will be included using the
migration process (subsection Migration of HfX 2).
Migration of HfX2
In our KMC model, densification happens all over the surface.
It may happen into the sublayer, in which case a high c.n. for
Hf to previously under-coordinated oxygen is obtained, or it
may happen by reorganization of bonding at the smooth sur-
face, typically leading to a Hf c.n. of 3 or 4 from the under-
coordinated oxygen. In the cases discussed earlier, hafnium
with its remaining ligands has a total c.n. of 5 at least. How-
ever, densification may also happen when there is a low popu-
lation of surface oxygen (Fig. 3). In this case, the hafnium is
not coordinatively saturated. For instance, if HfX 2 contains two
bonds due to the bonding to the surface oxygen, it has total
c.n. of 4. In this situation, DFT calculations show that the haf-
nium of the precursor keeps its two ligands and no HX
desorption has been seen, as the activation energy is high.
The mobility of this four-coordinated HfX 2 has been seen dur-
ing ab initio MD.[6]
The migration process is only defined for three- or four-
coordinated HfX 2 (Ea 50.40 and 0.50 eV, respectively). In this
picture, a HfX 2
(0) fragment that has migrated to a cation site,
can come back to an oxygen atom O (1) at an anion site. The
reverse can also take place (O-HfX 2
(0) anion site to wð1Þ cation
site) as shown in Figure 3. In this situation, migration events
continue until the metal of the precursor becomes five or
more coordinated in total. For instance, if HfX 2 does densify
into possible sites with c.n. 5 5 or 7 (Fig. 3), the hafnium atom
remains pinned at this cation site. No reverse migration is
then possible any more. In this manner, any concerns regard-
ing the occurrence of random densification in the low coordi-
nated cation site are addressed.
The migration combined processes of random densification
and introduce a slow motion of Hf fragments over the low
coordinated anion sites of the oxygen-covered surface. We call
this motion “crawling.” The precursor fragment crawls over
areas with a low population of surface oxygen until the haf-
nium of the precursor finds a site that is abundant in oxygen
and thus obtains a high enough c.n. from the surface oxygen.
This mechanism allows subsurface vacancies to be filled. Our
tests show that this mechanism has a profound effect on film
growth in KMC.
Steric effect
The metal cation in the precursor molecule is surrounded by
ligands that are often large, as in the current case of
X5N(CH3)2. These ligands take up substantial space at the sur-
face when the precursor molecule or its fragments are adsorbed.
Many potential adsorption sites around such a fragment, there-
fore, lose their capability to adsorb further precursors. This steric
effect is obviously an important consideration, which affects the
rate of ALD growth and the statistics of the different configura-
tions in the KMC calculation. To model the interactions between
the remaining fragments of the precursors, and their secondary
influence on the adsorption sites, DFT calculations are used. Fig-
ure 4 shows the optimized structure of two neighboring HfX3
precursors at the surface, where both are anchored to under-
coordinated oxygen at the surface. The distance between the
hafnium atoms of the fragments is 8.4 A˚. Optimizing the geome-
try from other adsorption sites for HfX 3, no shorter Hf-Hf dis-
tance could be obtained, so this may be viewed as a minimum
value. The sites where closer approach was impossible (the
highlighted oxygen atoms in Fig. 4) have, therefore, temporarily
lost their ability to adsorb another precursor molecule. We term
this process “blocking.”
To implement this blocking at the surface, the neighbor list
of the site is used. Following adsorption of HfX 4 at the OH (0)
(c.n. 51) site, the relevant neighboring anion sites (the second
neighbors wð2Þ and fourth neighbors wð4Þ) are flagged as
blocked and drop out from the reaction list for adsorption
(Fig. 5). Similar blocking ofwð2Þ and wð4Þ is also applied when
fragments of precursors remain, namely HfX 3
(0) and HfX 2
(0)
Figure 2. Schematic diagram of densification of HfX 2 into empty cation sites.
The presence of more under-coordinated oxygen around the left-hand cation
site applies speculatively a stronger attractive force on the HfX2 adsorbate
than that at the right-hand site. The thicker black arrow indicates the stron-
ger attraction where reverse densification is impossible. Red arrows show
migration process. (Same scheme as Fig. 1). [Color figure can be viewed in
the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of densification and migration of HfO 2 (Same
scheme as Fig. 1). Black arrows show potential densification where reverse
densification is impossible. Red arrows show migration process. The migration
process occurs until a c.n. greater than 2 is obtained by hafnium of the precur-
sor. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 251
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


before densification. Implementation of blocking after densifi-
cation is slightly different, as now HfX 2
(0) is on a cation site.
The neighboring anion sites that it blocks are wð1Þ and wð3Þ
(see Fig. 6).
The other potential steric effect is the blocking of Hf frag-
ments from densifying at a cation sites, due to the existence of
fragments at adjacent sites. When hafnium, together with the
remaining ligands, is densified to a cation site wð0Þ, it might pre-
vent further densification in the neighboring cation sites wð2Þ.
However, DFT calculations show that densification of such frag-
ments to adjacent cation sites is possible. Figure 7 shows three
neighboring HfX2 in which ligands are aligned to each other.
The distance between Hf-Hf in the HfX 2 is slightly stretched to
minimize repulsion between the remaining fragments. Applying
the blocking process to the adjacent anion sites ensures that
there is enough surface area available for these fragments.
DFT calculations show that as many HfX as possible can be
densified into the adjacent cation positions. In Figure 8, four
HfX are densified into adjacent cation positions. The typical
minimum distance between Hf-Hf in bulk HfO 2 is 3.3 A˚. In Fig-
ure 8, the distance between the highlighted Hf in the cluster
is also 3.3 A˚. This means that the repulsion between the
remaining ligands declines in a surface covered with HfX when
compared to HfX 2. The presence of HfX does not prevent
adsorption at next neighboring anion sites wð3Þ. Therefore, fol-
lowing desorption of HX from HfX 2 to leave HfX, blocking is
lifted from all the surrounding anion sites.
H2O adsorption
The probability of H 2O adsorption from the gas phase, like
HfX4 adsorption, is described by Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics
[eq. (4)]. In DFT simulations, we find that adsorption of Lewis
basic H 2O takes place at specific sites of sufficient Lewis acid-
ity, namely Hf atoms that are not coordinatively saturated. For
instance, the X fragments in adsorbed HfX 3 push H 2O away
Figure 5. Schematic 2D diagram of blocking after adsorption of the unden-
sified hafnium precursor. The filled boxes show blocked sites with respect
to further adsorption of HfX4 due to the presence of HfX 4 adsorbate at the
surface site on the left (Same scheme as Fig. 1). [Color figure can be
viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 6. Schematic diagram of blocking after densification of the hafnium
precursor onto a cation site. The presence of HfX 2 at the cation site pre-
cludes adsorption (filled boxes) at fewer sites than in HfX 4 at an anion site
(Fig. 5). [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available
at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 7. A cluster of three HfX 2 in adjacent cation/cation sites (DFT). The
highlighted oxygen atoms are some of those that are blocked with respect
to adsorption of another hafnium precursor. The Hf-Hf distance is stretched
(3.9 A˚) to minimize repulsion between the aligned ligands. [Color figure can
be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 4. Steric hindrance between two HfX 3 from DFT calculation. Steric
hindrance leads to a change in the adsorption pattern of the precursors in
ALD. Some of the blocked sites are highlighted indicating that they are
unable to adsorb the next Hf precursor. (Red 5O, White 5H, large
grey 5Hf, dark grey 5C, and blue 5N). [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
252 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


from Hf and prevent bonding of the water molecule. Results
from ab initio MD and DFT calculations show that adsorption of
aH 2O molecule to an existing HfX occurs, provided that another
HfX exists as a second neighbor of this HfX site, a so-called
“cooperative” reaction.[6] Therefore, adsorption of H 2O occurs at
a pair of HfX or low coordinated Hf. The H 2Om o l e c u l ei si n i t i a l l y
bridging between under-coordinated (Fig. 9) hafnium, and is
then decomposed by the neighboring oxygen or nitrogen into
H 1OH. The adsorption of H 2O is, therefore, a type b event.
There is no steric blocking of adjacent sites by adsorbed H 2O.
H2O densification and ligand exchange
Possible H2O adsorptions at the HfX-H 2O(0) (cation site) clusters
are followed by densification of the H 2O molecule on to the
wð1Þ anion sublattice so that oxygen becomes coordinated to a
greater number of neighboring Hf. Similar to HfX 2, densification
of a H 2O molecule is a type c event which changes the occupa-
tion of an anion and its neighboring cation site. Upon densifica-
tion, the c.n. of affected sites are updated, particularly the
neighboring HfX. The result of DFT calculations demonstrates
that the presence of bridging O atoms in the neighborhood of
the HfX significantly enhances the rate of desorption of HX at
this site. Thus, densification of H 2O and the resulting increase in
the c.n. of the HfX sites means that desorption of the remaining
HX is more likely to occur during the oxygen pulse. The net
effect is an exchange of X 2 with OH 2, albeit via an indirect
route and with a change in surface location. This process is a
combination of structural relaxation and a cooperative effect.
As mentioned earlier, desorption of the last HX from HfX
has an activation energy which depends on the c.n of the cat-
ion site. For instance, barriers to desorption of HX from five,
six, and seven coordinated Hf(HX) in the cation sites are 1.64,
0.83, and 0.56 eV, respectively. Hence, desorption of this HX is
facilitated by densification of a H2O molecule to a neighboring
anion site, as this causes the c.n. to increase. Desorption of
the last ligand from seven or eight coordinated HfX leaves Hf
in the cation site with bulk-like coordination to O.
H2O migration
After adsorption of a H 2O molecule, it is densified into an
empty anion site, chosen randomly. In most cases, the adsorbed
H2O molecule is quickly dissociated by neighboring oxygen
atoms to yield OH 1OH (subsection H 2O decomposition). These
oxygen are usually strongly basic. However, in some cases, the
H2O molecule densifies to a low coordinated anion site and so
becomes attached to fewer Hf atoms. As with HfX 2 migration
above, migration of H 2O is introduced so as to allow the mole-
cule to escape from such less favorable sites. This event is type
c. Activation energies for migration of a water molecule from
anion to cation sites depend on the c.n. achieved as a result of
densification: 0.43, 0.83, and 1.20 eV, respectively for one, two,
and three coordinated H 2O. However, when migration of the
H2O molecule is removed from the reaction list, the effect on
the growth rate and quality of film is found to be insignificant.
We conclude that the difference between random densification
and densification incorporating H2O migration is negligible.
H2O decomposition
Results of DFT calculations show that the densified H 2O mole-
cule is easily dissociated by the loss of H 1 to basic oxygen or
nitrogen atoms. In order to include this in KMC model, the
H2O molecule is decomposed into OH 1OH due to the exis-
tence of under-coordinated oxygen at a neighboring anion
site wð2Þ (type b). Figure 10 shows how the proton of densi-
fied H 2O can be abstracted by oxygen at neighboring anion
sites. DFT calculations show that only one or two coordinated
oxygen can dissociate the H 2O molecule, and that the dissocia-
tion rate strongly depends on the c.n. of the neighboring
anion site. This reaction was not observed for more highly
coordinated oxygen neighbors (c.n.53 or 4).
H2O desorption
An adsorbed H 2O molecule decomposes due to the existence
of adjacent Lewis bases (low coordinated oxygen, c.n 51o r
Figure 8. A cluster of four HfX in adjacent cation/anion sites (DFT). The dis-
tance between highlighted hafnium atoms (3.3 A ˚) shows that repulsion
between the aligned ligands is less problematic than in the case depicted
in Figure 7. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is avail-
able at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 9. Schematic diagram of H 2O molecule adsorption in two dimen-
sions. H 2O adsorption occurs in the cation site, due to the presence of
another HfX (2) at the neighboring cation site (cooperative event). Densifica-
tion of the H 2O molecule (red arrow) occurs randomly into an empty anion
site wð1Þ. (Same scheme as Fig. 1). [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 253
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


2). In the absence of Lewis basic sites, it remains as a molecule
of H 2O and can possibly desorb from the system. Ab initio MD
shows that desorption of a H 2O molecule happens more read-
ily than desorption of the metal precursor. No other process
for desorption of oxygen is considered here, as the other O-
containing fragments are charged (O 2
2,O H 2, [OHfX] 1 etc.).
NEB calculations show that an activation energy of 0.46 eV is
required to detach H2O with c.n. 51 for O (excluding H) from
fully coordinated hafnium with c.n. 57 and 0.83 eV for that
from c.n. 56. Such energy barriers can be easily overcome
during the ALD process, especially if the temperature is
increased. This event is type a.
Neglected reactions
As every site of the anion sublattice is connected to three or
four cation sites, through densification oxygen can obtain up
to c.n.54 to Hf over the span of the oxygen pulse. We con-
sider oxygen with c.n. 53 or 4 as bulk-like oxygen. However,
some of the oxygen remains one or two coordinated to Hf.
One-coordinated oxygen (possibly with H) is the active sites
for adsorbing HfX4 in the next pulse. The activation energy
computed with DFT for hopping of O or OH after densification
Figure 10. Schematic diagram of H 2O molecule decomposition in two dimen-
sions. The activation energies for proton transfer are specified by the different
c.n. of the two oxygen neighbors. The thicker arrow indicates stronger attrac-
tion by one coordinated oxygen to abstract a proton from H2O. (Same scheme
as Fig. 1). [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at
wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 11. Top view of the surface evolution during the first cycle. Snapshots show: (A) The substrate which includes two layers of oxygen (O and OH
groups). (B) The end of the metal pulse with a surface that is depleted of protons due to the desorption of HX. (C) The end of the purge with a minor
amount of further desorption. (D) The end of the oxygen pulse in which the arrival of H 2O molecules causes oxygen and protons to be introduced to the
surface. Fragments for discussion (a–f ) are highlighted by circles. The dashed box shows an area where adsorption of the next metal precursor is block ed
because of the steric effect.
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
254 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


is too high to be significant for low temperature ALD. Hence,
in the present study, oxygen and OH diffusion are ignored.
Following adsorption of a H 2O molecule, densification or
decomposition into OH groups may occur. However, no evi-
dence was observed by DFT of two hydroxyl groups recombin-
ing again to produce a H 2O molecule. Therefore, this
recombination reaction is not considered in our KMC model.
The final type of reactions to be neglected were CVD-like
reactions. These are known to be a significant component of
HfO2 growth from alkylamide precursors. We expect that the
inclusion of CVD-like reactions would increase the growth rate.
However, in the current calculations, the growth achieved by
pure ALD reactions only is reported.
Results and Discussion
The dimensions of the simulation cell are 5.8 3 5.8 3 6.8 nm.
The cell can contain 20 (111) layers of bulk monoclinic HfO 2 in
the z-direction. Every (111) layer of HfO 2 includes 256 sites for
Hf (cation sites) and 512 sites for O (anion sites) which will
become occupied during the simulation.
Figure 11 shows the top view of the evolution of the surface
during the first ALD cycle. Growth begins from an ideal situation in
which the substrate is saturated with a regular array of OH groups
(Fig. 11A). The initial surface cell is constructed so as to consist of
256 O (c.n. 52 or 3) atoms and 256 OH groups (c.n. 51, for O
e x c l u d i n gH ) .I tw a sa s s u m e dt h a tthese highly coordinated oxy-
gen (c.n. 52 or 3) are attached to hafnium atoms of a sublayer
beyond the cell. Figures 11B–11D are snapshots taken at the end
of the first metal precursor pu l s et i m e ,a tt h ee n do ft h ep u r g e
time, and at the end of the first oxygen pulse time, respectively.
The pulse and purge times are both set at 0.1 ms.
During the metal pulse, protons are observed to “bounce”
frequently between the surface oxygen and the nitrogen of the
HfX4 or HfX 3 or HfX 2. These diffusion events continue in time
until all the remaining nitrogen of a precursor fragment has
become protonated (multiple proton diffusion). In this situation,
desorption of HX is facilitated [6] and different species (the
remaining fragments) can be seen at the surface, see Figure 11.
We have carried out alternative KMC simulations where multiple
proton diffusion is switched off and single-proton diffusion is
followed by HX desorption with slow kinetics. No evidence of
growth is observed in these simulations at 500 K.
In H2O pulses, the remaining ligands are desorbed from the sur-
face and replaced with OH groups. The net effect is deposition of
bulk-like HfO2 leaving an OH2 terminated surface for the following
cycle. An average of 0.6 60.02 A˚/cycle of HfO 2 is deposited in
each cycle. Growth is observed simultaneously in multiple layers
rather than a single smooth layer in each cycle. An average of 8.6
3 107 events is executed in each cycle. In total, over 200 reaction
types are considered in reaction list. Simulation of 40 cycles takes
approximately 34 h on one central processing unit (CPU).
Our simulations show that the population of surface species
changes with temperature. The presence of different species
changes the reaction pathways and their associated activation
energies, impacting the growth rate. In this situation, owing to
the change of activation energies, a longer pulse time should
be considered at low temperature and surface saturation is
achieved more rapidly at high temperature. In this study, satu-
ration is obtained with the pulse and purge time both set at
0.1 ms. No further adsorption of HfX4 is observed by choosing
to use a longer pulse time (i.e., 0.2 ms) at T 5500 K. Hence,
exposure of both precursors to the surface is set to 27 L. The
exposure of precursor and comparison with experiment will be
the subjects of our future article.
The metal precursor pulse
Figure 11B shows the fragments remaining after one metal
precursor pulse. Due to the ALD reactions, desorption of
ligands as HX has occurred. The surface has become depleted
of protons. The remaining HfX3, HfX 2, and HfX fragments at
the surface prevent further adsorption of HfX 4, that is, the sur-
face is saturated. For instance, between species 2a and 2e,
there are low coordinated substrate oxygen atoms, but insuffi-
cient space for adsorption of the metal precursor to occur. The
Figure 12. (A) Proton population in film and number of events for 20
cycles. Pulse and purge time have been both fixed at 0.1 ms and tempera-
ture is 500 K. Proton population and number of events increase constantly
due to the accumulation of protons in the subsurface layers. (B) (a) Start of
metal pulse (cycle), (b) start of purge, (c) start of oxygen pulse, (d) start of
purge, and (e) end of cycle. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue,
which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 255
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


proton population in the film as a function of time is shown
for 20 cycles in Figure 12. Desorption of HX is visible as a
sharp decrease in the proton population at the start of each
metal pulse. Correlated with this, there is a sharp decrease in
the number of events at the beginning of each metal pulse.
The proton concentration remains low up to the start of the
oxygen pulse (Fig. 11C). Dissociation of the H 2O molecule sup-
plies a source of protons for renewed HX desorption. Hence,
many of the remaining ligands are eliminated (Fig. 11D). At
the beginning of the oxygen pulse, an increase in the number
of events is observed (Fig. 12). This corresponds to an increase
in the proton population, introducing many proton diffusion
events between oxygen atoms.
The number of protons in the film increases constantly dur-
ing subsequent ALD cycles (Fig. 12). Those protons remain in
the layers below the surface. This is unclear whether this is an
artifact of our KMC scheme or whether it matches experiment.
The protons can undergo proton diffusion reactions within the
sublayers but, without access to X, there is no effect on
growth. These events are, therefore, wasteful of CPU time. For
instance, the CPU time per cycle increases by a factor of 1.5
between the 5th cycle and 40th cycles, almost entirely due to
unproductive diffusion of protons in sublayers. Those protons
can be observed as OH groups in the dashed box of Figure
13, which shows the end of the metal pulse after 18 cycles.
Those OH groups are highly coordinated or blocked. Despite
the free space around them, adsorption of the next metal pre-
cursor does not take place.
During the metal pulse, ALD reactions (particularly desorp-
tion of HX) are decreased, owing to the depletion of the H 1
coreagent. The number of events, which depends on H and X,
is decreased. Interactions between the remaining precursors
prevent further adsorptions. However, the self limiting nature
of ALD is not solely a consequence of depletion of coreagent.
As highlighted in Figure 13 (dashed box), depletion of active
sites also prevents further adsorptions. In addition, inert HfX
and HfHX fragments (square) resist desorption of the final
ligand, regardless of H1 concentration.
All energetically accessible remnants of the Hf precursor (HfX 4,
HfX3,H f X2, and HfX) can be observed at the end of metal pulse,
which we now discuss. One HfX4 can be seen in Figure 11B-b and
this species is desorbed intact during the purge (Fig. 11C) as there
are not enough protons in its neighborhood to protonate its
ligands. The HfX4 population changed from 0.14 nm22 at the end
of the first cycle to zero at the end of 18th cycle.
HfX3 is the other species that is often seen during the initial
c y c l e s .T h i ss p e c i e si sh i g h l i g h t e di na ,e ,c ,a n dd( F i g .1 1 B ) .I ft h e r e
are insufficient protons in the neighborhood of the adsorbed HfX4,
then the product is HfX 3 rather
than HfX 2.T h i si sb e c a u s e
desorption of HX from HfX 3 is
m o r ed i f f i c u l tt h a nf r o mH f X4.[6]
This species has been observed
less in later cycles than in first
cycles. For instance, the HfX 3
population changed from 0.62
nm22 at the end of the first
metal pulse to only 0.02 nm 22
HfX3 at the end of the 18th
metal pulse (circle in Fig. 13).
HfX2 is not visible in the
snapshots of the first cycle
shown (Fig. 11) although it is
an important intermediate
during KMC. This is because its
lifetime is too short here.
However, in the next cycles,
HfX2 does appear at the
Figure 13. Top view of the surface at the end of the 18th metal pulse.
HfX3, HfX 2, and HfX are highlighted by circle, hexagon, and square, respec-
tively. The dashed box shows free space where adsorption of HfX 4 does
not occur. The O and OH groups in the dashed box are highly coordinated
or blocked by the remaining ligands. [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 14. Side view of ALD growth for HfO 2 after 20 cycles. (A) Direct adsorption of H 2O molecules through HfX is
considered (cooperative effect is neglected). As a result, the growth rate is overestimated by a factor of 2 that
obtained when including the cooperative effect only. (B) Cooperation between the HfX is considered to adsorb H 2O
molecule. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
256 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


surface and lasts longer. For instance, the HfX 2 population is
0.59 nm 22 at the end of the 18th metal pulse (Fig. 13 hexa-
gon), which is much higher than that in the first cycle. The Hf
in these HfX 2 are always three or four coordinated.
We now discuss the reasons for the persistence of HfX 2 in
later cycles. If through the densification process Hf becomes
highly coordinated (c.n. /C215), ALD reactions will continue rapidly
until the remaining fragment is HfX. In Figures 13 and 11B-a,
the dominant configuration is HfX. However, if Hf remains
under coordinated (c.n.<5), despite the densification process,
the migration event occurs. In this case, the HfX 2 population is
constant while this species diffuses slowly across the surface
(referred to as “crawling”). Crawling will continue until the pre-
cursor remnant densifies into a cation site with a higher c.n.
ALD reactions will then occur rapidly on the remaining frag-
ment of HfX2, until it terminates at HfX again, ultimately result-
ing in a smooth and dense film (Figs. 16B and 14B).
The growth rate for the 16th–20th cycles of ALD is reported
in Figure 15. When all the ALD reactions are considered, the
growth rate varies between 0.49 and 0.75 A˚/cycle. This simula-
tion includes both cooperative effect and structural relaxation
(densification and migration). These KMC growth rates are in
excellent agreement with experimental results considering that
no parameters were fitted to experiment. [31–33] For example, a
growth rate of 0.78 A˚/cycle is reported by Cho et al. [31] at 300/C14 C.
In order to examine the effect of HfX 2 migration on the
growth rate in KMC, the migration process was turned off.
Turning this migration off resulted in a growth rate that varies
between 0.12 and 0.20 A˚/cycle for the 16th–20th cycles (Fig.
15). In other words, excluding the migration causes a low
growth rate and poor quality of growth (Fig. 16A).
In spite of migration being allowed, Hf in the remaining
HfX2 fragment sometimes does not obtain a high enough c.n.
and remains three or four coordinated. In those situations, dis-
sociation of HX does not happen, even though there are suita-
ble protons at the surface (Fig. 13, dotted box). The system
becomes trapped in a set of adjacent local minima (superba-
sin), where migration happens repeatedly, with no net effect,
other than wasting CPU time.
HfX species are the dominant species at the growing surface
at the end of metal pulse [Figs. 11B and 13 (square)]. For
instance, the HfX population changes from 1.51/nm 22 at the
end of first cycle to 1.42/nm 22 and 1.90 nm 22 at the end of
the 18th and 20th cycles, respectively. Such variation may be
correlated with the cycle-to-cycle variation in growth rate.
The purge time
When ALD reactions self-terminate, the remaining ligands block
the surface and this persists into the purge step. We have exam-
ined our KMC simulations to see if further surface reactions are
taking place during the purge. For instance in Figure 11B-c, we
see that some HfX 3 remains at the surface because there are not
enough protons in its neighboring sites. After a period of time
during the purge, due to
longer-range proton diffusion
across oxygen atoms, all nitro-
gen atoms of these HfX3 frag-
ments become protonated and
some of them desorb as HX.
Then, the remnant densifies to
the neighboring HfX (Fig. 11C-
c). This illustrates that slow pro-
ton diffusion and associated
reactions such as desorption of
HX continue during the purge
time. Indeed, Figure 12 shows
that reaction events (mainly
proton diffusion) continue at
roughly the same frequency
during both purges, with just a
small decrease over time. This
decrement corresponds to the
minor desorption during the
Figure 15. Growth rate of HfO 2 in different circumstances versus time for
the 16th–20th cycles. The thickness of a monolayer of HfO 2 is 2.8 A˚. Cross
shows growth rate considering all observed ALD reactions. Circle shows
growth rate when direct ligand exchange during oxygen pulse is consid-
ered rather than cooperative effect. Triangle shows growth rate when
migration process is switched off. [Color figure can be viewed in the online
issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
Figure 16. Top view of ALD film growth for HfO 2 after 20 cycles. (A) Migration is removed from the reaction
list; a low growth rate and poor quality of film is obtained. (B) Structural relaxation events are considered; a
realistic growth rate and dense film are achieved. [Color figure can be viewed in the online issue, which is avail-
able at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 257
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


purge time. Of course, a longer pulse duration would allow this
desorption to occur during the pulse instead of during the purge.
The KMC simulations thus illustrate that fast reactions saturate
quickly, whereas slow reactions take orders of magnitude longer.
This disparity may explain experimental saturation curves and
the difficulty in choosing the optimum pulse/purge time.
The water precursor pulse
Chemisorption of the H 2O molecule onto a Lewis acidic sur-
face of Hf is a necessary first step for dissociation of the H 2O
molecule. Individual Hf have low acidity when bound to a
ligand X like N(CH3)2. However, we have found that the H 2O
molecule can adsorb through cooperation between a cluster
of HfX fragments. [6] Such a cluster can be seen in Figure 11C-
c, where five HfX are in close proximity. In Figure 11D-c, all of
these X ligands have been replaced with OH groups. The clus-
ter in Figure 11C-d undergoes a similar reaction to Figure 11D-
d. The lifetime of molecular H 2O is too short for it to be
observed frequently during the simulation.
By contrast, isolated HfX that is not part of a cluster cannot
undergo ligand exchange during the oxygen pulse (Fig. 11D-
f ). We have attempted running the KMC model with direct
ligand exchange at isolated HfX rather than in a cluster and
we observe that the growth rate increases to 1.41–1.59 A ˚/
cycle, over twice that obtained when only the cooperative
effect is included (Fig. 15). A side view of the simulation box
for this direct exchange simulation is shown in Figure 14A.
As indicated in Figure 11C-c, creation of a cluster of HfX
during the metal pulse is statistically probable. The necessity
of the cooperative effect for adsorption of a H 2O molecule,
discussed energetically before, [6] is shown quantitatively in
KMC. Dissociation of the H 2O molecule creates active sites (OH
groups) for the next cycle, as seen in Figure 11D-c.
Incoming protons from dissociation of H 2O molecules in the
clusters (e.g., Fig. 11D-c) cause nitrogen atoms in the remain-
ing ligands to become protonated (Fig. 11C-d). Hence, two
HfX3 lose their remaining ligands to become HfX and densify
into the surface. Then, those HfX create a cluster such as Fig-
ure 11C-c, during the oxygen pulse. The lifetime of this inter-
mediate is short and, therefore, it is not visible in this
snapshot. Ligand exchange immediately happens through the
reaction pathway presented for Figure 11D-c, causing the final
HX desorb, leaving an OH2 terminated surface (Fig. 11D-d).
As well as delivering protons, dissociation of H 2O molecules
will also deliver oxygen to the surface. The new oxygen atoms
become highly coordinated as the number of remnant ligands
decreases, and so these oxygen atoms are densified into the
surface and subsurface layers resulting in a dense film. As a
result, further desorption of the remaining ligands is facilitated.
However, if the incoming oxygen atoms are poorly coordi-
nated, then they become the active sites for the next Hf pulse.
The incoming protons from the dissociation of H 2O also cause
desorption of the remaining ligands. The HfX 3 fragment in Fig-
ure 11C-a at the end of the purge loses HX until it terminates as
HfX in Figure 11D-a at the end of the oxygen pulse. As there is
no HfX at the neighboring sites, in the case of Figure 11D-a as
well as 4f, the metal precursor terminates in HfX at the end of
the cycle. This is significantly different from the simple/common
assumption that all ligands are eliminated in every ALD cycle.
The case illustrated in Figure 11C-e is slightly different. Desorp-
tion of HX results in densification of the metal precursor to a
pre-existing HfX neighbor. One of the Hf atoms obtains suffi-
cient c.n. from the densified oxygen by dissociation of the H 2O
molecule at this site. Further desorption of HX occurs from this
cluster and fully coordinated Hf does not cooperate to adsorb a
further H2O molecule. Hence, another HfX present in the cluster
remains under-coordinated in Figure 11D-e.
In each cycle, the “freshly deposited” fragments of Hf pre-
cursor are usually widely spaced, rather than in clusters, due
to the steric bulk of the precursor. Therefore, creation of a
cluster of HfX may not happen during a single cycle. However,
metal precursors arriving during the next metal pulse may
combine with pre-existing HfX to create clusters. These clus-
ters are active sites for adsorption of H2O molecules such as
those shown in Figure 11C-c. In this way, almost all ligands are
eventually eliminated over many cycles. Moreover, the ALD
growth continues simultaneously in different layers and, there-
fore, a cluster may be created that spans multiple layers.
Conclusions
In this study, we develop a 3D on-lattice KMC model to describe
the ALD reactions for growth of HfO2 from Hf(N(CH3)2)4 and H2O.
We implement all reactions that had been observed in first prin-
ciples calculations[6] as discrete events in the on-lattice KMC sim-
ulation. The fundamental chemistry of ALD and its dependence
on the local environment at the surface are implemented using
c.n. and neighbor list. This includes all steps, from the early stage
of adsorption of each ALD precursor, kinetics of the surface pro-
tons, interaction between the remaining precursors (steric effect),
influence of remaining fragments on adsorption sites (blocking),
densification of each ALD precursor, migration of each ALD pre-
cursor, and cooperation between the remaining precursors to
adsorb H 2O (cooperative effect). Without any fitted parameters,
the resulting simulations show the growth of smooth and con-
formal thin film at growth rates in agreement with experiment.
We propose the migration of the low coordinated precursor
fragments (here HfX 2) over areas with a low population of sur-
face oxygen. This process introduces a slow motion (crawling)
in the mesoscale. The validity of this and other proposed reac-
tion pathways (e.g., multiple proton diffusion) is statistically
established in the mesoscale.
The formation of one monolayer of precursor fragments—cru-
cial for ALD—and the statistical di stribution of the remaining frag-
ments is shown at the end of the metal pulse. Adsorption and
dissociation of H2O in clusters of adsorbed HfX are described, lead-
ing to the delivery of oxygen and protons to the surface during
the oxygen pulse. Through these processes, the remaining ligands
desorb from the surface, leaving the surface with bulk-like HfO2
terminated by OH for the next cycle. However, creation of a cluster
of HfX may not happen during a single cycle. Therefore, we specu-
late that some isolated HfX does not desorb from the surface at
the end of oxygen pulse and persists for multiple cycles instead.
The number of reaction events correlates strongly with the
number of protons in the film. The kinetics of the surface
FULL PAPER WWW.C-CHEM.ORG
258 Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 WWW.CHEMISTRYVIEWS.COM
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


protons are effective in leading to ligand desorption. Proton
transfer is the dominant reaction in the event list. Depletion of
protons during the metal pulse and delivery of protons during
the oxygen pulse cause alternately a decrease and then an
increase in the number of events. Some of the introduced pro-
tons persist in the bulk and do not participate in the ALD
reaction leading to waste of CPU time.
ALD growth is observed to occur simultaneously in different
layers. In this way, the inherent roughness of the growth pro-
cess can be quantified, which is another key property of ALD.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the SFI/HEA Irish Centre for High-End Com-
puting (ICHEC) for the provision of computational facilities and sup-
port. The authors thank Dr. Kevin Berwick for critically reading the
manuscript and his constructivecomments. They also thank Dr. A.
Esteve, Dr. M. Djafari Rouhani, and Dr. C. Mastail for their instructive
discussion.
Keywords: density functional theory /C1 kinetic Monte-Carlo /C1
atomic layer deposition /C1 chemical vapor deposition
How to cite this article: M. Shirazi, S. D. Elliott. J. Comput.
Chem. 2014, 35, 244–259. DOI: 10.1002/jcc.23491
[1] A. O’Mahony, S. Monaghan, R. Chiodo, I. Povey, K. Cherkaoui, R. Nagle, E.
O’Connor, R. Long, V. Djara, D. O’Connell, F . Crupi, P . K. Hurley, and M.
Pemble,ECS Trans.2010, 33, 69, Available at http://ecst.ecsdl.org/content/
33/2/69.full.pdf1html, http://ecst.ecsdl.org/content/33/2/69.abstract.
[2] P . K. Hurley, E. O’Connor, S. Monaghan, R. Long, A. O’Mahony, I. M.
Povey, K. Cherkaoui, J. MacHale, A. Quinn, G. Brammertz, M. Heyns, S.
Newcomb, and V. V. Afanas’ev,ECS Trans. 2009, 25, 113, Available at
http://ecst.ecsdl.org/content/25/6/113.full.pdf1html, http://ecst.ecs-
dl.org/content/25/6/113.abstract.
[3] T. Hirvikorpi, M. Vh-Nissi, A. Harlin, M. Karppinen, Thin Solid Films
2010, 518, 5463, ISSN 0040-6090, Available at http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S00406090100 05407.
[4] V. Miikkulainen, M. Leskela, M. Ritala, R. L. Puurunen, J. Appl. Phys.2013,
113, 021301, Available at http://link.aip.org/link/?JAP/113/021301/1.
[5] R. A. Adomaitis, Chem. Vap. Depos. 2011, 17, 353, ISSN 1521-3862,
Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cvde.201106922.
[6] M. Shirazi, S. D. Elliott, Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878, Available at http://
pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/cm303630e, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/
10.1021/cm303630e.
[7] R. Puurunen, Chem. Vap. Depos. 2003, 9, 249, ISSN 1521-3862, Avail-
able at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cvde.200306265.
[8] M. A. Alam, M. L. Green, J. Appl. Phys. 2003, 94, 3403, Available at
http://link.aip.org/link/?JAP/94/3403/1.
[9] S. D. Elliott, Langmuir 2010, 26, 9179, Available athttp://pubs.acs.org/doi/
pdf/10.1021/la101207y, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/la101207y.
[10] Z. Hu, J. Shi, C. H. Turner, Mol. Simul. 2009, 35, 270, Available at http://
www.ingentaconnect.com/content/tandf/gmos/2009/00000035/000000
04/art00002.
[11] M. D. Groner, F. H. Fabreguette, J. W. Elam, S. M. George, Chem. Mater.
2004, 16, 639, Available at http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/
cm0304546, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/cm0304546.
[12] A. Voter, In Radiation Effects in Solids, Vol. 235, NATO Science Series;,
K. Sickafus, E. Kotomin, B. Uberuaga, Eds.; Springer: Netherlands, 2007;
pp. 1–23, ISBN 978-1-4020-5293-4.
[13] J. Amar, Comput. Sci. Eng.2006, 8, 9, ISSN 1521-9615.
[14] C. Battaile, D. J. Srolovitz, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2002, 32, 297,
Available at http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/pdf/10.1146/annurev.
matsci.32.01210 2.110247, http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/
10.1146/annurev.matsci.3 2.012102.110247.
[15] K. Reuter, First-Principles Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations for Heterogene-
ous Catalysis: Concepts, Status, and Frontiers; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH
and Co. KGaA: Weinheim, 2011; pp. 71–111, ISBN 9783527639878, Avail-
able at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9783527639878.ch3.
[16] I. Neizvestny, N. Shwartz, Z. S. Yanovitskaja, A. Zverev, Comput. Mater.
Sci. 2006, 36, 36, ISSN 0927-0256, Proceedings of the Second Confer-
ence of the Asian Consortium for Computational Materials Science—
ACCMS-2, Second Conference of the Asian Consortium for Computa-
tional Materials Science, Available at http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0927025605001989.
[17] A. Dkhissi, A. Esteve, C.Mastail, S. Olivier, G. Mazaleyrat, L. Jeloaica, M.
D. Rouhani, J. Chem. Theory Comput.2008, 4, 1915, Available at http://
pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ct8001249, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/
10.1021/ct8001249.
[18] R. J. Bartlett, M. Musiał, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2007, 79, 291, Available at
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/RevModPhys.79.291.
[19] J. Greer, J. Comput. Phys. 1998, 146, 181, ISSN 0021-9991, Available at
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999198959538.
[20] F. El-Mellouhi, N. Mousseau, L. J. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B 2008, 78, 153202,
Available at http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.78.153202.
[21] K. Reuter, D. Frenkel, M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett.2004, 93, 116105.
[22] D. T. Gillespie, J. Phys. Chem. 1977, 81, 2340, Available at http://
pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/j100540a008, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/
10.1021/j100540a008.
[23] G. Mazaleyrat, A. Estve, L. Jeloaica, M. Djafari-Rouhani, Comput. Mater.
Sci. 2005, 33, 74, ISSN 0927-0256, Proceedings of the E-MRS 2004
Spring Meeting; Symposium H: Atomic Materials Design: Modelling and
Characterization, E-MRS 2004 Spring Meeting, Symposium, Available at
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0927025604003416.
[24] A. Bortz, M. Kalos, J. Lebowitz, J. Comput. Phys. 1975, 17, 10, ISSN
0021-9991, Available at http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0021999175900601.
[25] A. Chatterjee, A. F. Voter, J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 194101, Available
at http://link.aip.org/link/?JCP/132/194101/1.
[26] S. Plimpton, C. Battaile, M. Chandross, L. Holm, A. Thompson, V. Tikare,
G. Wagner, E. Webb, X. Zhou, C. G. Cardona, A. Slepoy, Crossing the
Mesoscale No-Man’s Land via Parallel Kinetic Monte Carlo; Sandia
Report, 2009, sandia national laboratories albuquerque, USA.
[27] A. Slepoy, A. P . Thompson, S. J. Plimpton, J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128,
205101, Available at http://link.aip.org/link/?JCP/128/205101/1.
[28] X. Zhao, D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 2002, 65, 233106, Available at
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.233106.
[29] G. Henkelman, B. P . Uberuaga, H. Jonsson, J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113,
9901, Available at http://link.aip.org/link/?JCP/113/9901/1.
[30] S. D. Elliott, G. Scarel, C. Wiemer, M. Fanciulli, G. Pavia, Chem. Mater.
2006, 18, 3764, Available at http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/
cm0608903, http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/cm0608903.
[31] M. Cho, H. B. Park, J. Park, S. W. Lee, C. S. Hwang, G. H. Jang, J. Jeong,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2003, 83, 5503, Available at http://link.aip.org/link/
?APL/83/5503/1.
[32] L. Nyns, A. Delabie, J. Swerts, S. Van Elshocht, S. De Gendt, J. Electrochem.
Soc. 2010, 157, G225, Available at http://jes.ecsdl.org/content/157/11/
G225.full.pdf1html, http://jes.ecsdl.org/content/157/11/G225.abstract.
[33] D. M. Hausmann, R. G. Gordon, J. Cryst. Growth 2003, 249, 251, ISSN
0022-0248, Available at http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0022024802021334.
Received: 24 July 2013
Revised: 24 October 2013
Accepted: 30 October 2013
Published online on 19 November 2013
FULL PAPERWWW.C-CHEM.ORG
Journal of Computational Chemistry2014, 35, 244–259 259
 1096987x, 2014, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jcc.23491 by Technische Informationsbibliothek Hannover, Wiley Online Library on [06/12/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
