Atomic Layer Deposition of Hafnium Oxide from Hafnium
Chloride and Water
Atashi B. Mukhopadhyay,† Charles B. Musgrave,† and Javier Fdez. Sanz* ,‡
Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford UniVersity, 380 Roth Way, Stanford, California
94305, and Departamento de Quı´mica Fı´sica, Uni Versidad de SeVilla, E-41012 SeVilla, Spain
Received March 6, 2008; E-mail: sanz@us.es
Abstract: Hafnium oxide (HfO 2) is a leading candidate to replace silicon oxide as the gate dielectric for
future generation metal-oxide-semiconductor based nanoelectronic devices. Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
has recently gained interest because of its suitability for fabrication of conformal ﬁlms with thicknesses in
the nanometer range. This study uses periodic density functional theory (DFT) to investigate the mechanisms
of both half-reactions occurring on the growing surface during the ALD of HfO2 using HfCl4 and water as
precursors. We ﬁnd that the adsorption energy and the preferred site of adsorption of the metal precursor
are strong functions of the water coverage. As water coverage increases, the metal precursor preferentially
interacts with multiple surface adsorption sites. During the water pulse the removal of Cl can be facilitated
by either a ligand exchange reaction or the dissociation of Cl upon increase in coordination of the Hf atom
of the precursor. Our predicted potential energy surface indicates that a more likely mechanism is hydration
of the adsorbed Hf complex up to a coordination number of 7, followed by the dissociation of a chloride ion
that is stabilized by solvation. Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics (BOMD) simulations of an adsorbed
metal precursor in the presence of a multilayer of water shows that Cl dissociation is facile if sufﬁcient
water molecules are present to solvate the Cl- anions. Hence, solvation plays a crucial role during the
water pulse and provides an alternative explanation for why ALD growth rates for this system decrease at
high temperatures.
Introduction
Moore’s law, which states that the number of electronic
devices in integrated circuits increases exponentially over time,
has driven the microelectronic industry for the past several
decades. However, continued scaling of semiconductor devices
requires the integration of novel fabrication processes and new
materials into future semiconductor technology. For example,
as the thickness of the SiO2 gate dielectric in silicon metal oxide-
semiconductor ﬁeld effect transistor devices approaches atomic
dimensions, the tunneling current through the gate dielectric
increases exponentially and serious performance and reliability
issues arise.1 Hence, there is a need for an alternative higher
permittivity gate dielectric (high-k) to replace SiO2.2 In addition,
the deposition process must result in uniform, conformal and
pinhole-free thin ﬁlms of the high-k dielectric material with
atomic level control over large areas. HfO2 has become a leading
candidate to replace SiO 2 due to its relatively high dielectric
constant, sufﬁcient band offset from Si, low electrical conduc-
tivity, and good thermodynamic stability against silicide
formation.3–5 Among other possibilities, atomic layer deposition
(ALD) has been proposed for the deposition of high- k gate
dielectrics, including HfO 2, because of its ability to deposit
uniform and conformal thin ﬁlms.6–10 ALD can be viewed as a
chemical vapor deposition process based on sequential, self-
terminating reactions between the surface and precursors.
Because the precursors are introduced into the reactor separately,
ALD does not involve gas phase reactions, meaning that it is
ideally a completely surface-reaction-limited process. To achieve
the desirable characteristics of ALD deposited ﬁlms, the
precursors must possess several key chemical and physical
properties. They must be volatile and thermally stable and must
either chemisorb on the substrate or react rapidly with the
surface groups resulting from the previous pulse in order to reach
the saturation stage rapidly and thereby ensure a reasonable
deposition rate.
ALD of HfO2 using HfCl4 as the metal precursor and water
as the oxygen source has been studied extensively 11,12 It is
widely believed that in the ALD of metal oxides using water
† Stanford University.
‡ Universidad de Sevilla.
(1) Kingon, A.; Maria, J.-P.; Streiffer, S.Nature (London)2000, 406, 1032.
(2) Packan, P. A. Science 1999, 285, 2079.
(3) Ritala, M.; Leskela, M.; Niinisto, L.; Prohaska, T.; Friedbacher, G.;
Grasserbauer, M. Thin Solid Films1994, 250,7 2.
(4) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kiisler, A.-A.; Uustare, T.; Sammelselg, V. Thin
Solid Films 1999, 340, 110.
(5) Sankur, H. O.; Gunning, W. Appl. Opt. 1989, 28, 2806.
(6) Ritala, M.; Kukli, K.; Rahtu, A.; Raisanen, P. I.; Leskela, M.;
Sajavaara, T.; Keinonen, J. Science 2000, 288, 319.
(7) Cho, M. H.; Roh, Y. S.; Whang, C. N.; Jeong, K.; Nahm, S. W.; Ko,
D. H.; Lee, J. H.; Lee, N. I.; Fujihara, K. Appl. Phys. Lett.2002, 81,
472.
(8) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Ma¨ndar, H.; Sammelselg, V.; Uustare, T.J. Cryst.
Growth 2000, 220, 105.
(9) Aarik, J.; Ma ¨ndar, H.; Kirm, M.; Pung, L. Thin Solid Films 2004,
466,4 1.
(10) Kukli, K.; Aarik, J.; Ritala, M.; Uustare, T.; Sajavaara, T.; Lu, J.;
Sundqvist, J.; Aidla, A.; Pung, L.; Harsta, A.; Lesela, M. J. Appl.
Phys. 2004, 96, 5298.
(11) Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C. B. J. Chem. Phys.2002, 117, 1931.
(12) Kukli, K.; Ritala, M.; Sajavaara, T.; Keinonen, J.; Leskela ¨, M. Thin
Solid Films 2002, 416,7 2.
Published on Web 08/13/2008
10.1021/ja801616u CCC: $40.75  2008 American Chemical Society11996 9 J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2008, 130, 11996–12006
Downloaded via LEIBNIZ UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER on December 6, 2024 at 13:05:09 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


as the oxygen source that surface hydroxyls play an important
role as the reactive species that remain on the surface of the
growing ﬁlm after the water pulse.13–15 During the metal
precursor (HfCl 4) pulse hydroxyl groups are thought to react
with the incoming precursor producing a surface bound complex
that consists of the precursor with a reduced number of chlorine
ligands. In the subsequent water pulse, this intermediate reacts
with water and the surface is converted from chlorine termina-
tion to hydroxyl termination. These reactions of gaseous HfCl4
and H2O with the surface during the precursor and waterpulses,
respectively, can be summarized by the two half-reactions:
HfO2(OH)m+nHfCl4(g) fHfO2(OH)m-n(O - HfCl3)n +
nHCl(g) (1)
HfO2(OH)m-n(O - HfCl3)n +
3nH2O(g) fHfO2(OH)m-n(O - Hf(OH)3)n + 3nHCl(g) (2)
where HfO2(OH)m stands for a hydroxylated HfO 2 surface.
Due to the high technological relevance of ALD processes,
much experimental work has been devoted to understanding of
the details of the mechanism. However, although the usefulness
of computational techniques is widely recognized, the number
of theoretical studies on this subject appears to be relatively
low. In the case of the ALD of HfO2 this dearth is not surprising
due to the well-known hurdle involved in the realistic modeling
of both transition metal surfaces and surface reactions. Thus,
most of the previous mechanistic work has addressed the ALD
of HfO2 on silicon and silicon oxide substrates. 11,12,16–19 Yet,
the number of mechanistic studies investigating the ALD of
HfO2 on as-grown HfO 2 is even more scarce. Furthermore, in
order to make the simulations tractable, the few theoretical
studies that have been done describe the surface using cluster
models of limited size which neglect the effect of both the
environment relaxation and the electrostatic ﬁeld of the extended
surface. Similarly, the ALD of related transition metal oxides,
such as TiO2 and ZrO 2, on SiO 2 using their corresponding
halides as precursors has also been theoretically studied using
either naked cluster models20 or introducing environment effects
through a QM/MM approach. 21 Moreover, a common aspect
of the simulations of metal oxide ALD that use SiO 2 surfaces
as a substrate are intended to model the initial substrate
conditions that take place in the ﬁrst few ALD cycles, which
most likely differs signiﬁcantly from the mechanisms on the
as-grown oxide.
ALD under steady state conditions, i.e., conditions subsequent
to initiation and the point at which the thickness of the deposited
HfO2 ﬁlm has increased so that each ALD cycle is identical to
the previous cycle, involves ALD on as-grown HfO 2 surfaces.
However, modeling of these surfaces brings additional chal-
lenges commonly found in the simulation of transition metal
oxides, which are better described using periodic slab models.
Also, different ALD growth conditions can lead to changes in
the HfO2 growth surface because different crystal faces of HfO2
are stabilized differently by the nature of the water/hydroxyl
ﬁlm on the growing surface, which depends on the temperature
and water partial pressure. We previously reported ﬁrst prin-
ciples studies of the structure and stability of various dehydrated
and hydrated monoclinic HfO2 surfaces22,23 that predicted that
the monoclinic HfO2 (1j11) face is the most stable under strictly
anhydrous conditions, but the presence of water decreases the
surface energy of the m-HfO 2 (001) face, making it thermody -
namically more stable under ALD process conditions. The
hydroxylated (001) HfO2 surface consists of different adsorption
sites, including bridging oxygen sites and hydroxyl groups. An
additional challenge to take into account is the variability of
the coordination number of Hf atoms, as it is a transition metal
element, and exhibits coordination numbers ranging from 4 to
8. Although this feature has not been considered in any of the
previous studies, the activation barriers of the elementary ALD
reactions may be highly sensitive to the Hf coordination number.
Here, we present a theoretical study of the ALD of HfO 2 on
as-grown HfO2 using state-of-the-art periodic DFT simulations
and for this purpose have performed a detailed analysis of the
chemical mechanisms of both half-reactions occurring on the
growing surface during the ALD of HfO2 using HfCl4 and water.
This contribution does not report a comprehensive study of all
active pathways subsequent to the reactions of the precursor
and water with the growing surface. For example, reactions
leading to densiﬁcation, such as condensation reactions between
neighboring hydroxyl groups, are not reported here. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst theoretical simulation to
consider the effect of different coordination numbers of Hf as
well as the effect of various adsorption sites on the reaction
energetics of the ALD process. The ﬁrst phase of this study
involves an approach based on a series of static structural
optimizations and calculated energies at low water coverage.
However, during the water pulse, i.e., in the high water coverage
regime, there is a large number of possible conﬁgurations that
makes a comprehensive investigation of the chemistry during
the water pulse from a static point of view extremely complex
(and likely incomplete). Therefore, we also carried out ﬁrst
principles molecular dynamics simulations on the Born-Oppen-
heimer potential energy hypersurface. These simulations showed
that under the water pulse conditions, a more efﬁcient mecha-
nism for the removal of chlorine is viable that involves
(13) Matero, R.; Rahtu, A.; Ritala, M.; Leskela ¨, M.; Sajavaara, T. Thin
Solid Films 2000, 368,1 .
(14) Puurunen, R. L. J. Appl. Phys.2004, 95, 4774.
(15) Alam, M. A.; Green, M. L. J. Appl. Phys.2003, 94, 3403.
(16) Deminsky, M.; Knizhnik, A.; Belov, I.; Umanskii, S.; Rykova, E.;
Bagaturyants, A.; Potapkin, S.; Stoker, M.; Korkin, A.Surf. Sci.2004,
549,6 7.
(17) Esteve, A.; Rouhani, M. D.; Jeloaica, L.; Esteve, D. Comput. Mater.
Sci. 2003, 27,7 5.
(18) Jeloaica, L.; Esteve, A.; Rouhani, M. D.; Esteve, D. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2003, 83, 542.
(19) Fenno, R. D.; Halls, M. D.; Raghavachari, K. J. Phys. Chem. B2005,
109, 4969.
(20) Hu, Z.; Turner, C. H. J. Phys. Chem.2006, 110, 8387.
(21) Hu, Z.; Turner, C. H. J. Am. Chem. Soc.2007, 129, 3863.
(22) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Sanz, J. F.; Musgrave, C. B. Phys. ReV.B
2006, 73, 115330.
(23) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Sanz, J. F.; Musgrave, C. B. Chem. Mater.
2006, 18, 3397.
Table 1. Adsorption Energies of HfCl 4 (in kcal/mol) on Different
Adsorption Sites on the (001) Surface of HfO 2 as a Function of
Water Coverage
coverage
(H2O molecule.nm-2)a
bridge-O
site
hydroxyl
site
dibridge
sites
bridge-hydroxyl
sites
di-hydroxyl
sites
0 (0%) 40.7 -- - -
1.9 (25%) 26.9 4.7 35.2 33.4 16.9
3.8 (50%) 23.5 14.7 33.8 35.6 16.1
5.7 (75%) 25.5 15.8 25.6 32.4 20.1
7.6 (100%)- 25.5 -- 22.3
a The percentage of water coverage is shown in parentheses.
J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008 11997
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 from HfCl4 and H2O ARTICLES


subsequent ligand elimination reactions from the adsorbed metal
precursor driven by solvation of chloride ions.
Surface Models and Computational Approach
The ﬁrst step in the modeling of the m-HfO 2 surface concerns
the choice of the exposed face and degree of hydroxylation. Under
growth conditions both the monoclinic (1 j11) and (001) faces of
HfO2 have been observed with the ratio of the two depending on
the experimental variables. As stated above, we showed that
although the anhydrous (1j11) surface is more stable, the (001)
termination is preferred after surface hydroxylation. Therefore, given
that the reaction involves water as an oxygen source, we chose the
m-HfO2 (001) face for further modeling. Also, with the aim of
modeling the extended nature of the surface we adopted the well-
known supercell approach with periodic three-dimensional spanning.
The supercell consisted of a 2×2 array of unit cells four-layers
thick and vacuum with the thickness of the slab chosen so that
both surface energies and surface atom displacements were
converged. Every layer of HfO2 is composed of three atomic
sublayers with a central plane containing HfO and two planes of
bridging oxygen atoms above and below the central plane. We found
that a vacuum width of 15 Å was wide enough to prevent slab-to-
slab interactions. Further replication of this supercell along the three
lattice vectors resulted in a ﬁnal model consisting of an arrangement
of parallel HfO2 slabs exhibiting the (001) surface separated by
vacuum. Additional computational details are provided in reference
22.
Density functional theory (DFT) based calculations were carried
out under periodic conditions using the Vienna ab initiosimulation
package (VASP).24,25 In these calculations the energy was calcu-
lated using the PW91 generalized gradient approximation (GGA)
implementation of DFT proposed by Perdew et al.26,27 The
electronic states were expanded in a plane wave basis set with an
energy cutoff of 450 eV. The calculations were performed using
the projected augmented wave (PAW) approach as implemented
in the VASP code.28 For Hf atoms, the semicore 5p electrons have
been included in addition to the 5d 2 and 6s 2 valence electrons
because we previously found that explicitly including the 5p
electrons is required in order to obtain correct lattice parameters
for bulk HfO2.22 The 2s and 2p electrons of O atoms and the 3s
and 3p electrons of Cl atoms were explicitly described. Preliminary
test calculations with k-point sampling meshes of varying size
revealed that computations at theΓ point were reasonable while
allowing a noticeable speed up of the extensive calculations here
reported. Thus, comparing energies calculated using a 2×2×1 mesh
to those calculated using just the Γ point we found the energy
converged to within 0.01% and nearly identical optimized structures,
while the speedup was about 450%. Such an improvement was
especially desirable for the calculations of transitions states as well
as for the intensive molecular dynamics simulations. This ap-
proximation also seems reasonable bearing in mind the size of the
cell and the number of atoms of our model: 120-130 atoms in the
static calculations and more than 240 atoms in the MD simulations.
Forces on the ions were calculated using the Hellmann-Feynman
theorem and adjusted using the Harris-Foulkes correction to the
forces.29 This approach for calculating the forces allows a geometry
optimization using the conjugate-gradient scheme. Iterative relax-
ation of atomic positions was stopped when the change in total
energy between successive steps was less than 0.001 eV. The
transition states were located using the climbing image nudged
elastic band method as implemented in VASP.30,31
Results and Discussion
First Half-Reaction or Metal Precursor Pulse.To investigate
the reactions of HfCl 4 with the growing surface we must ﬁrst
determine the surface sites present under the growth conditions
and then how the precursor interacts with these sites. The
anhydrous m-HfO2 (001) surface is terminated by oxygen atoms
that are coordinated to two hafnium atoms. Relative to the usual
bulk coordination it exhibits a large number of broken Hf -O
(24) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J. Phys. ReV.B 1993, 47, R558.
(25) Kresse, G.; Furthmuller, J. Comput. Mater. Sci.1996, 6,1 5.
(26) Perdew, J. P.; Chevary, J.; Vosko, S.; Jackson, K.; Pederson, M.; Singh,
D.; Fiolhais, C. Phys. ReV.B 1992, 46, 6671.
(27) Perdew, J. P. In Electronic Structure in Solids; Ziesche, P., Eschrig,
H. Eds.; Akademie Verlag: Berlin, 1991.
(28) Blo¨chl, P. E. Phys. ReV.B 1994, 50, 17953.
(29) Harris, J. Phys. ReV.B 1985, 31, 1770.
(30) Henkelman, G.; Uberuaga, B. P.; Jonsson, H. J. Chem. Phys.2000,
113, 9901.
(31) Henkelman, G.; Jonsson, H. J. Chem. Phys.2000, 113, 9978.
Figure 1. Structure of adsorbed HfCl4 at bridge oxygen sites of the monoclinic HfO2 (001) surface with coverages of (a) 0 and (b) 5.7 H 2O molecule.nm-2.
The white, red, green, and gray spheres represent hydrogen, oxygen, chlorine, and hafnium atoms, respectively.
11998 J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008
ARTICLES Mukhopadhyay et al.


bonds (22.8 nm -2).23 Water molecules readily adsorb on this
surface leading to a hydrated surface whose structure strongly
depends on the experimental conditions. The water on m-HfO2
(001) phase diagram theoretically estimated from DFT periodic
calculations23 shows that water dissociatively chemisorbs on
the m-HfO2 (001) face and gives rise to a surface with a wide
range of hydroxyl coverages. Therefore, because the experi-
mental conditions for HfO 2 ALD vary during the process, for
example, during transients, it seems reasonable to begin by ﬁrst
considering the possible scenarios that correspond to the
different degrees of water coverage. For instance, at a typical
ALD water partial pressure of 10.1 Pa, the m-HfO2 (001) surface
retains a coverage greater than 9.5 H 2O molecules.nm -2 at
temperatures below 400 K. Upon increasing the temperature
water coverage decreases due to desorption of water. Above
400 K the coverage reduces to 5.7 H 2O molecules.nm-2 and
further decreases to 1.9 H 2O molecules.nm -2 when the tem -
perature increases to 600 K. The m-HfO 2 (001) surface only
becomes completely dehydroxylated above 860 K. Hence,
during the metal precursor pulse the adsorption of HfCl 4 on
the HfO2 surface can occur on various types of reactive sites
depending upon the water coverage of the surface. Furthermore,
HfCl4 can adsorb on either single or multiple sites. In the case
of adsorption to a single adsorption site the precursor can bind
to the surface through either oxygen atoms bound to two Hf
atoms (bridge oxygens) or to hydroxyl groups. In the case of
adsorbing to multiple surface sites the interaction can be with
two bridge oxygen atoms, (dibridge sites), with two hydroxyl
groups (dihydroxyl sites) or a mixed bridge oxygen and hydroxyl
group (bridge-hydroxyl sites).
The adsorption energies of HfCl 4 on the various adsorption
sites of the m-HfO 2 (001) surface as a function of coverage of
water are reported in Table 1. Notice that because we are adding
a given number of water molecules per unit cell, the water
coverage is not a continuous function. As can be seen in Table
1 both the adsorption energy and the preferred site are strong
functions of the water coverage. Starting with the bare (com-
pletely dehydroxylated) surface, in which only bridge oxygen
sites are available, we found a strong HfCl4-surface interaction
with an adsorption energy of 40.7 kcal/mol, which is the largest
value of adsorption energy of the adsorbed states we have
calculated. Increasing the water coverage noticeably lowers the
adsorption energy, converging to an interaction energy of about
25 kcal/mol. The largest adsorption energy for HfCl4 adsorbing
on the completely dehydroxylated surface can be understood
by comparing the structures of the adsorbed HfCl 4 molecule at
this site for coverages of 0 and 75% as reported in Figure 1a
and b. On the completely dehydroxylated surface (Figure 1a)
additional interactions exist from dative bonding between two
chlorine atoms of the precursor and under-coordinated neighbor-
ing surface hafnium atoms. As water coverage increases these
additional interactions are precluded as intervening hydroxyl
groups saturate the under-coordinated Hf atoms. Table 1 also
shows that adsorption at the dibridge sites on the completely
Figure 2. Structure of adsorbed HfCl 4 at dibridge oxygen sites on the
m-HfO2 (001) surface with coverages of (a) 1.9 and (b) 5.7 H 2O
molecule.nm-2
.
Figure 3. Structure of the HfCl4 precursor adsorbed at a bridge-hydroxyl
multiple site of the m-HfO 2 (001) surface with a water coverage of 5.7
H2O molecule.nm-2 (75%).
J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008 11999
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 from HfCl4 and H2O ARTICLES


dehydroxylated surface was found to be unstable, likely due to
the strain of the rigid four-membered cycles involved.
As the water coverage increases, the metal precursor pref-
erentially interacts with multiple adsorption sites. In general, it
is observed that the largest adsorption energies at any water
coverage involve sites with bridge oxygen atoms combined with
either each other or with hydroxyl groups. Thus, at 25%
coverage the dibridge sites are preferred while at 50 and 75%
coverage adsorption on the mixed bridge-hydroxyl sites is found
to be more stable. The relative stability of the dibridge
adsorption sites at low water coverage results from the
constraints imposed by a relatively small unit cell and the
uniform distribution of water imposed by the periodic boundary
conditions. Thus, at low water coverages the supercell slab
model presents the adsorbing precursor with bridge and dibridge
sites, mixed bridge-hydroxyl sites and hydroxyl sites, but with
hydroxyls spaced too far apart to allow coordination to two
hydroxyls on precursor adsorption. However, on the actual
surface at the same water coverage ﬂuctuations in coverage will
present some dihydroxyl sites for adsorption. At 100% water
coverage bridge oxygen atom sites are no longer available so
that dibridge and mixed adsorption sites are precluded. However,
for lower coverages it is worth noting that like the precursor-
bridge oxygen interaction, the adsorption energies on dibridge
sites are also a function of coverage. Indeed, on increasing the
water coverage from 25 to 75% the adsorption energy of HfCl4
on dibridge sites decreases from 35.2 to 25.6 kcal/mol. This
behavior can again be understood by analyzing the effect of
water coverage on the interactions between the chlorine atoms
of the precursor and the undercoordinated hafnium atoms of
the substrate. At both 25 and 50% water coverage undercoor-
dinated hafnium atoms still persist, but by 75% coverage all
surface Hf atoms are fully coordinated, either bound to surface
oxygens or to adsorbed water. These interactions are illustrated
in Figure 2a and b, which depict the structures of adsorbed HfCl4
on dibridge oxygen sites at coverages of 25 and 75%,
respectively.
Experimentally, it is found that the growth per cycle decreases
with increasing temperature. Increasing the temperature causes
desorbtion of water and dehydroxylation, thereby decreasing
the coverage of hydroxyl groups on the surface. The ALD
literature often describes the role of surface hydroxyl groups
as the only anchoring group for metal precursors. In contrast,
our adsorption energies indicate that bridge oxygen atoms
present on the HfO2 surface have the largest adsorption energy.
Hence, the relationship between the amount of metal precursor
anchored to the surface and the hydroxyl group density and
thereby its relation to the ALD growth rate does not seem to
be straightforward.13
At moderate water coverages (50 and 75%) bridge-hydroxyl
sites are the preferred precursor adsorption sites with the
adsorption energies of HfCl4 on these sites being 35.6 and 32.4
kcal/mol, respectively. At 100% coverage the metal precursor
primarily interacts with surface OH groups and the adsorption
energy decreases to 22-25 kcal/mol. It is worth noting that at
high coverages the adsorbed precursor also interacts with
neighboring surface hydroxyl groups through hydrogen bonding.
Our previous study which reported the ab initio phase diagram
Figure 4. Potential energy proﬁle for the ligand exchange reaction between gaseous HfCl 4 and Hf-OH (s) where the metal precursor is adsorbed at a
bridge-hydroxyl mixed site. The stationary points correspond to (a) initial reactant: Hf -(OH) (s) + HfCl4 (g), (b) adsorbed complex: Hf-(OH).HfCl4(s), (c)
transition state, (d) adsorbed HCl on the HfO 2 surface, and (e) products: Hf -OHfCl3 + HCl.
12000 J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008
ARTICLES Mukhopadhyay et al.


relating the water on HfO2 surface energy to the partial pressure
of water and temperature predicts that coverages approaching
100% can only occur at temperatures below 450 K. However,
at the optimum ALD conditions for HfO2 deposition using HfCl4
and H 2O (commonly 575 K and 10.1 Pa), the surface water
coverage is approximately 5.7 H 2O molecule.nm -2 (75%).
Therefore, according to Table 1, under the optimal ALD
conditions the bridge-hydroxyl sites are the preferred ones for
metal precursor adsorption. The optimized structure of HfCl4
adsorbed on this site (see Figure 3) shows the Hf atom of the
adsorbed precursor 2.24 and 2.09 Å away from hydroxyl oxygen
atom and bridge oxygen atoms, respectively and additional
hydrogen bonding interactions between the Cl of HfCl4 and the
surface. Because of the larger stability of this structure we will
adopt it as a model for further analysis of the reaction
mechanism during the water pulse. A further comment here
concerns the adequacy of the DFT functional used in these
calculations as it has been pointed out that pure PWGGA
functionals tend to moderately overestimate the strength of
(32) Ugliengo, P.; Pascale, F.; Merawa, M.; Labeguerie, P.; Tosoni, S.;
Dovesi, R. J. Phys. Chem. B.2004, 108, 13632.
Figure 5. Comparison of the potential energy proﬁles for the reaction of gaseous HfCl 4 and Hf-OH(s) calculated using a cluster model (dashed line) and
a periodic model (full line) with 100% coverage. The data for the cluster model have been taken from Reference 33. The stationary points correspond to ( a)
initial reactant: Hf -(OH) (s) + HfCl4 (g), (b) adsorbed complex: Hf -(OH).HfCl4 (s), (c) transition state, and (d) products: Hf -OHfCl3 + HCl.
Scheme 1.Reaction of Water with the Pre-Adsorbed Metal Precursor Complex during the Water Pulse Followed by Either Dissociation of a
Cl- Ion or a Ligand Exchange Reaction
J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008 12001
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 from HfCl4 and H2O ARTICLES


hydrogen bonds. 32 Although it has not been quantiﬁed for
hydrogen bonding to chloride ions, we do not expect this to
signiﬁcantly change the energetics of the processes investigated
in this work.
Once the precursor is adsorbed on the surface, various
possible reaction mechanisms are feasible. One path that has
been proposed involves ligand exchange in which Cl is
abstracted from the precursor to produce HCl, which desorbs
as outlined in reaction 1 above. In Figure 4, we show the
potential energy surface, PES, for the ligand exchange reaction
between HfCl4 and a surface hydroxyl group, where the metal
precursor is adsorbed on a bridge-hydroxyl site. Note that this
PES is schematic in the sense that only stationary points are
calculated and the lines drawn connecting these states are only
indicative of the reaction path. According to Table 1, the
adsorbed precursor is 32.4 kcal/mol more stable than the
entrance channel. This intermediate undergoes an exchange
reaction through a transition state with a barrier of 30.0 kcal/
mol relative to the adsorbed precursor and energy 2.4 kcal/mol
below the entrance channel. The product HCl is initially weakly
physisorbed and then desorbs to leave an HfCl3 group on the
surface.
Comparing these results with those calculated using the cluster
model of the surface can give an indication of how well the
cluster model represents the reacting surface for the conditions
of high coverage. We previously reported cluster DFT simula-
tions of ligand exchange reactions associated with the ﬁrst and
second ALD half-reactions on the as-grown HfO 2 surface.11,33
The clusters used to model the surface hydroxyl sites were Hf-
[O-Hf(OH)3]3-OH and Hf 8O22H13-OH, which correspond to
the limit of 100% water coverage. The adsorption energy
estimated from the cluster calculations of 24.1kcal/mol is in
quite good agreement with the 25.5 kcal/mol obtained using
the periodic model at 100% water coverage. Figure 5 shows
the potential energy proﬁles for the ligand exchange reaction
between HfCl4 and a single surface hydroxyl group calculated
using both cluster and periodic model calculations (100%
coverage). As can be seen the overall reaction proﬁles are quite
similar. The activation barrier heights with respect to the energy
of the intermediate complex for the ligand exchange reaction
from the cluster and periodic models are 20.2 and 23.1 kcal/
mol, respectively. These results show that the cluster models
used in previous studies were a reasonable approach to model
the surface in the regime of high water coverage.
Second Half-Reaction or Water pulse. After the metal
precursor pulse the ALD reactor is usually purged with an inert
gas, such as nitrogen, to remove any undesirable excess reactant
from the reaction chamber. This purge is followed by a pulse
of water vapor injected into the reactor with the goal of replacing
chlorine atoms of the Hf-Cl terminated surface with OH groups
to regenerate the Hf-OH terminated surface. We ﬁrst consider
the addition of a water molecule to the preadsorbed HfCl 4
precursor (1a) as shown in Scheme 1.
(33) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Musgrave, C. B. Chem. Phys. Lett.2006, 421,
216.
Scheme 2.Cascade of Reactions Occurring from the Aquo-tri-chloro-hafnium Complex a
a Structure 2a is structure 1c, the product of Cl ion dissociation, in Scheme 1.
12002 J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008
ARTICLES Mukhopadhyay et al.


Our calculations show that water adsorption proceeds over a
0.2 kcal/mol barrier and is exothermic by 8.8 kcal/mol. During
this almost barrierless process the coordination number of Hf
atom of the adsorbed complex increases from 6 to 7 (see Scheme
1, structure1b). However, addition of another water molecule
to this complex is endothermic by 2 kcal/mol, suggesting that
a coordination number of 7 is preferred here. This aquo-tetra-
chloro complex (1b) is characterized by having one of the
Hf-Cl bonds signiﬁcantly stretched (2.6 Å). This structure
easily dissociates to give a chloride ion, which remains bound
to the surface through interactions with hydroxyl groups (1c),
with a barrier height of 3.0 kcal/mol and reaction energy 0.9
kcal/mol exothermic. Although the dissociation reduces the
coordination number of Hf from 7 to 6, the increase in stability
is likely due to the interaction of the chloride ion with the
surface. Alternatively, the aquo-tetra-chloro complex1b may
undergo a ligand exchange reaction, as indicated by structure
1d, Scheme 1. Our calculations show that this reaction is
endothermic by 2.1 kcal/mol and involves a signiﬁcant activation
barrier of 8.1 kcal/mol, indicating that the Cl- ion dissociation
pathway is preferred.
The aquo-trichloro-hafnium complex (1c) resulting from Cl-
ion dissociation may now undergo a cascade of reactions either
of ligand exchange type or with water followed by ligand
exchange. Also, additional dissociation of chloride ions is
possible resulting in a reaction scenario that might be quite
involved. Some of the possible reactions for this complex are
depicted in Scheme 2.
Let us start with the ligand exchange reaction represented in
Scheme 2 which transforms structure 1c, hereafter labeled as
2a, into structure 2b. The initial step involves a barrier height
of 24.0 kcal/mol and as shown in Figure 6 produces an HCl
molecule weakly bound to the surface that subsequently desorbs.
The whole process is endothermic by 10.0 kcal/mol. The second
possibility is dissociation of a Cl- ion from 2a leading to
structure 2c. The barrier for this dissociation is similar to that
of Scheme 1 although now the reaction is exothermic by 2.9
kcal/mol. Notice that in this case the adduct is 3-fold anchored
to the surface, increasing the Hf coordination number and
therefore the stability of the adduct. We were not able to isolate
an Hf complex 2-fold bound to the surface during the structural
optimization.
The reaction steps ( 2af2b and 2af2c) represented in
Scheme 2 could now be repeated for the successive removal of
the remaining chlorine atoms from the surface Hf adduct. Yet,
bearing in mind the results obtained so far, it seems reasonable
to conclude that in the presence of even small amounts of water,
either the ligand-exchange reaction or Cl- dissociation have little
chance to occur. Instead, the more likely mechanism is hydration
of the surface Hf complex 2a until reaching a Hf coordination
number of 7, species2d, which subsequently transforms to either
2e or 2f. As shown in the PES of Figure 7, water addition to
the aquo-trichloro hafnium complex is clearly favored. From
this structure, the ligand-exchange reaction involves a barrier
of 10.0 kcal/mol and is exothermic by 1.5 kcal/mol (step2df2e
in Scheme 2). Alternatively, Cl - dissociation from 2d to give
species 2f is expected again to involve only a small barrier. Of
course, eventually a proton must be transferred from the water
ligands to the surface in order to equilibrate the global charge
of both adduct and surface.
Figure 6. Potential energy proﬁle for the ligand exchange reaction between gaseous water and the preadsorbed metal precursor. Notice that the precursor
Hf atom of the adsorption complex is 5-fold coordinated. The stationary points correspond to (a) initial reactants: -HfCl3(s) + H2O (g), (b) adsorbed
complex: -HfCl3.H2O (s), (c) transition state, (d) adsorbed HCl on HfO 2 surface, and (e) products: -HfCl2.OH + HCl.
J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008 12003
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 from HfCl4 and H2O ARTICLES


The dissociation of hydrated- supported HfCl x adducts
involves the heterolytic cleavage of an Hf -Cl bond whose
energetic cost is nearly balanced by the interaction of the surface
with the Cl- ion resulting in an essentially thermal neutral
reaction. Furthermore, the relatively small 3 kcal/mol barrier
to this process indicates that it can easily be done at ALD
process temperatures. However, because the elementary step
itself appears to be only slightly exothermic it is far from being
a fast and complete reaction as expected for an ALD process.
In other words, the produced Cl- ions must be removed or
further stabilized on the surface for this reaction to have a
reasonable net rate. Of course, because ALD is conducted under
ﬂowing conditions, removal of volatile reaction products
increases the net rate of reaction.
We now consider how realistic these models are in the context
that under realistic ALD conditions such a “dry ambient” is far
from what actually occurs. In fact, it is well-known that water
molecules may be adsorbed from the gas phase forming
multilayers on the surfaces of various oxides, such as Al2O3,34
TiO2,35 SiO2,36 SnO2,37 ZrO2,38–40 and HfO 2.39,40 It is found
that the ﬁrst adsorbed layer is strongly bonded to the surface
by chemisorption and that the second layer is strongly bonded
to the ﬁrst chemisorbed layer by physisorption. Additional layers
are all physisorbed with slowly diminishing bonding strength
that approaches the bonding strength of liquid water. ZrO2 and
HfO2 show especially high adsorption loading due to their higher
polarity and higher site density. 40 Hence, under high water
partial pressures, such as occurs during the water pulse of HfO2
ALD, it is quite likely that several layers of water molecules
will be accommodated on the HfO 2 surface.
(34) Contescu, C.; Contescu, A.; Schwarz, J. A. J. Phys. Chem.1994, 98,
4327.
(35) Morimoto, T.; Nagao, M.; Tokuda, F. J. Phys. Chem.1969, 78, 243.
(36) Sneh, O.; Cameron, M. A.; George, S. M. Surf. Sci. 1996, 364,6 1.
(37) Egashira, M.; Nakashima, M.; Kawasumi, S. J. Phys. Chem. 1981,
85, 4125.
(38) Raz, S.; Sasaki, K.; Maier, J.; Riess, I. Solid State Ionics2001, 143,
181.
(39) Raghu, P.; Yim, C.; Shero, E. AIChE J. 2004, 50, 1881.
(40) Juneja, H. S.; Iqbal, A.; Yao, J.; Shadman, F. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
2006, 45, 6585.
Figure 7. Potential energy proﬁle for the ligand exchange reaction between gaseous water and the preadsorbed metal precursor complex. Notice that here
the Hf atom of the adsorbed precursor is 6-fold coordinated. The stationary points correspond to (a) initial reactant: -HfCl3.H2O (s) + H2O (g), (b) adsorbed
complex: -HfCl3.(H2O)2 (s), (c) transition state, (d) adsorbed HCl on the HfO 2 surface, and (e) products: -HfCl2.H2O.OH + HCl.
Figure 8. BOMD simulations performed on adsorbed precursors in the
presence of ﬁve layers of water.
12004 J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008
ARTICLES Mukhopadhyay et al.


To model these conditions we have performed Born -
Oppenheimer molecular dynamics (BOMD) simulations for a
metal precursor adsorbed on the surface, the initial conﬁguration
being that corresponding to structure2d of Scheme 2, in the
presence of a multilayer of water. The model consisted of four
layers of water placed upon the 75% water covered HfO2 surface
resulting in roughly 5 layers of water. Under these conditions,
the average density of water was 0.7 g/cc. We initiated the
simulations with a random velocity Boltzmann distribution
followed by an equilibration run of 1.4 ps at 100 K. These
structures were further heated to 300 K in 1000 time steps using
a velocity rescaling technique. The rate of heating was
maintained at 0.1 K/femtosecond to produce structures which
were further equilibrated for 2.0 ps at 300 K. After equilibration,
the structures were further heated from 300 to 575 K in 1000
time steps. After heating, the structures were again equilibrated
for 3.0 ps. Equilibration was performed under canonical
ensemble conditions performed using the Nose´ algorithm. In
total 9.6 ps of BOMD simulations were performed for four
different structures. In Figure 8 we summarize the scheme used
for the BOMD simulations on these structures. The time-step
in the numerical integration was 2 fs for all MD runs.
Before reporting the results of these simulations we should
mention the limited character of such calculations. For example,
both the size of the system and the restrictions on computational
time limit these simulations to short simulation times. Conse-
quently, the equilibration steps are most likely too short and
the heating ramps too fast. Therefore, the results may be
Figure 9. Snapshots of MD runs at (a) 4.6 ps (300 K), (b) 6.6 ps (575 K), (c) 8.4 ps (575 K), and (d) 9.6 ps (575 K). The Cl - ions of the adsorbed metal
precursors get solvated with water molecules associated with the water multilayer at 575 K. Note that concomitant with dissociation of Hf -Cl bonds
facilitated by solvation, the water adsorbed on the metal precursor looses its proton to the surface. Generally, one also sees the densiﬁcation proce ss, where
the precursor forms a third bond with the HfO 2 surface.
J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008 12005
Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2 from HfCl4 and H2O ARTICLES


interpreted only in a qualitative way. However, even with these
restrictions, meaningful conclusions can be drawn about the role
played by the solvent during the water pulse. First, we found
that the preadsorbed metal precursor was stable on the surface
up to 300 K, at least for the time we simulated. During
equilibration at 300 K, water molecules present in the vacuum
region undergo a reorientation and solvates Cl atoms. We also
observed some unusual processes. For instance, the water
molecule adsorbed on the metal precursor complex exchanges
protons with neighboring surface hydroxyl groups and water
molecules. Also, at 3.3 ps one of the water molecules adsorbed
on the metal precursor donates a proton to surface bridge oxygen
atom. Here, the time reported is more of a labeling system with
little physical signiﬁcance. After heating to 575 K, we noticed
that Hf-Cl bonds exhibited large elongations along the stretch-
ing vibrations, especially the Hf -Cl bond quasi-perpendicular
to the surface. This Cl atom was surrounded by water molecules
that were clearly pulling it. After a few picoseconds, this Hf-Cl
bond was broken resulting in a dichloro-complex on the surface.
These structures can be observed in the snapshots reported in
Figure 9, where the structures of a few relevant Hf adducts with
different numbers of Cl atoms are shown. In any case, even
bearing in mind the qualitative nature of this approach we can
see that Cl dissociation easily takes place at this typical ALD
temperature once there are water molecules nearby to solvate
the Cl- anions.
Additional insight may be obtained from Figure 10 where
we monitor the distance between all three Cl atoms attached to
the Hf atom belonging to metal precursor during the last 2.0 ps
of the MD simulation at 575 K. As can be seen, at∼8.4 ps, the
Hf-Cl bond length of one of the Cl atoms (represented as
dashed line in Figure 10) increases to 3.3 Å from an equilibrium
bond distance of 2.5 Å. As this Cl- ion dissociates from the
metal precursor, it gets stabilized by solvation by neighboring
water molecules throughout the remaining simulation period.
Further simulation of the adsorbed precursor leads to dissociation
of another Cl- ion (represented as a dotted line in Figure 10)
at around 8.8 ps.
Conclusions
In summary, we have performed periodic density functional
theory and BOMD simulations to investigate the mechanisms
of both half-reactions occurring during the earliest steps of the
ALD of HfO2 using HfCl 4 and water as precursors. We ﬁnd
that the adsorption energy and the preferred adsorption site for
the metal precursor are strong functions of the water coverage.
Experimentally, it is found that the growth per cycle decreases
when the temperature rises. Increasing the temperature causes
dehydroxylation, thereby decreasing the coverage of hydroxyl
groups on the surface. There is often some misconception in
the literature associated with the role of hydroxyl groups in ALD
where water is used as an oxygen source. They are usually
considered to be the only anchoring groups for metal precursors.
In contrast, our adsorption energies indicate that bridge oxygen
atoms present on HfO2 surface have the largest adsorption
energy. Hence, the relationship between the amount of metal
precursor anchored to the surface and the hydroxyl group density
and consequently the effect of hydroxyl group density on the
ALD growth rate does not seem to be straightforward.
As the water coverage increases, the metal precursor pref-
erentially interacts with multiple surface adsorption sites with
the distribution of these sites changing as a function of water
coverage. During the water pulse the removal of Cl can be
facilitated by either a ligand exchange reaction or the dissocia-
tion of Cl upon increase in coordination of the Hf of the
adsorbed precursor. Our calculated potential energy surface
indicates that a more likely mechanism is hydration of the
surface Hf complex until the Hf atom reaches a coordination
number of 7, followed by the dissociation of a chloride ion.
Furthermore, Born-Oppenheimer molecular dynamics (BOMD)
simulations of the adsorbed HfCl 4 precursor in the presence of
a multilayer of water show that Cl dissociation easily takes place
when sufﬁcient water molecules are nearby to solvate the Cl -
anions. Hence, solvation plays a central role during the water
precursor pulse.
Acknowledgment. We are grateful for the support of the
Stanford Initiative for Nanoscale Materials and Processing and the
Materials Structures and Devices SRC/DARPA MARCO Center.
This work was partially supported by the Spanish Ministerio de
Educacio´n y Ciencia, and the European FEDER, project MAT2008-
04918. J.F.S. thanks the Ministerio de Educacio ´n y Ciencia, the
Universidad de Sevilla and Stanford University for supporting his
sabbatical stay at Stanford. We also thank the computer resources
provided by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center-Centro Na-
cional de Supercomputacio´n.
JA801616U
Figure 10. Time-dependent distances of all three Hf -Cl bonds of the
adsorbed metal precursor complex for the last 2 ps of the simulation at 575
K. The ﬁrst Cl atom dissociates from the complex at 8.4 ps, followed by
the second Cl atom at 8.8 ps.
12006 J. AM. CHEM. SOC.9 VOL. 130, NO. 36, 2008
ARTICLES Mukhopadhyay et al.
