/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Shahmohammadi, M.;
Mukherjee, R.; Sukotjo, C.; Diwekar,
U.M.; Takoudis, C.G. Recent
Advances in Theoretical
Development of Thermal Atomic
Layer Deposition: A Review.
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
nano12050831
Academic Editor: Sotirios
Baskoutas
Received: 12 February 2022
Accepted: 25 February 2022
Published: 1 March 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
nanomaterials 
Review
Recent Advances in Theoretical Development of Thermal
Atomic Layer Deposition: A Review
Mina Shahmohammadi 1, Rajib Mukherjee 2,3 , Cortino Sukotjo 4
 , Urmila M. Diwekar 2,5, *
and Christos G. Takoudis 1,5, *
1 Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA;
mshahm2@uic.edu
2 Vishwamitra Research Institute, Crystal Lake, IL 60012, USA; rmukhe0@gmail.com
3 Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Texas Permian Basin, Odessa, TX 79762, USA
4 Department of Restorative Dentistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA;
csukotjo@uic.edu
5 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA
* Correspondence: urmila@vri-custom.org (U.M.D.); takoudis@uic.edu (C.G.T.)
Abstract: Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a vapor-phase deposition technique that has attracted
increasing attention from both experimentalists and theoreticians in the last few decades. ALD
is well-known to produce conformal, uniform, and pinhole-free thin ﬁlms across the surface of
substrates. Due to these advantages, ALD has found many engineering and biomedical applications.
However, drawbacks of ALD should be considered. For example, the reaction mechanisms cannot be
thoroughly understood through experiments. Moreover, ALD conditions such as materials, pulse
and purge durations, and temperature should be optimized for every experiment. It is practically
impossible to perform many experiments to ﬁnd materials and deposition conditions that achieve a
thin ﬁlm with desired applications. Additionally, only existing materials can be tested experimentally,
which are often expensive and hazardous, and their use should be minimized. To overcome ALD
limitations, theoretical methods are beneﬁcial and essential complements to experimental data.
Recently, theoretical approaches have been reported to model, predict, and optimize different ALD
aspects, such as materials, mechanisms, and deposition characteristics. Those methods can be
validated using a different theoretical approach or a few knowledge-based experiments. This review
focuses on recent computational advances in thermal ALD and discusses how theoretical methods
can make experiments more efﬁcient.
Keywords: atomic layer deposition (ALD); precursors; mechanisms; deposition characteristics
density functional theory; molecular dynamics; lattice Boltzmann method; Monte Carlo; group
contribution method; computer-aided molecular design
1. Introduction
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a vapor-phase technique to deposit thin-ﬁlm materi-
als on various substrates through sequential and self-limiting surface reactions [1]. ALD
originated from two different methods: atomic layer epitaxy (ALE) and molecular layering
(ML), which were ﬁrst introduced in the 1970s [ 2]. ALD then emerged due to the need
for precise ﬁlm thickness on small devices with high aspect ratios [ 2–4]. The thin ﬁlms
produced by ALD are deposited using chemical gas or vapor phase species, called precur-
sors, in a cyclic fashion [5]. Thus, ALD is often called an advanced form of chemical vapor
deposition (CVD). However, unlike CVD, ALD consists of alternative pulses and purges
of the precursors, resulting in deposition of the desired ﬁlm with an expected thickness
and composition [5,6]. Furthermore, ALD is often performed under vacuum and at various
ranges of temperatures, from room temperatures up to high temperatures, due to which
ALD has a wide temperature window [4].
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12050831 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/nanomaterials

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 2 of 25
Each cycle is composed of two half-cycles or half-reactions, in which up to one mono-
layer of a metal or metal oxide is deposited on the surface of the substrate [3]. During the
ﬁrst half-cycle, the precursor is carried by inert gas and pulsed into the reactor with a deter-
mined duration, reacts with the available active sites of the substrate, and is chemisorbed
on the surface [ 5]. In this step, ideally, the precursor saturates the surface through a
self-limiting reaction. Then, excess unreacted precursor molecules are purged out of the
chamber using inert gas. In the second half-cycle, the co-reactant pulses into the reactor
to react with the adsorbed precursor molecules on the substrate [ 7,8]. The common co-
reactants for ALD are water vapor, O 2, O3, and NH3 [9]. Finally, the excess co-reactant
molecules and the by-products of the reaction are purged out of the reactor. These two
half-cycles are repeated until the required ﬁlm thickness and composition are achieved [10].
The schematic of an ALD cycle is presented in Figure 1.
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 26 
 
 
and at various ranges of temperatures, from room temperatures up to high temperatures, 
due to which ALD has a wide temperature window [4]. 
Each cycle is composed of two half-cycles or half-reactions, in which up to one mon-
olayer of a metal or metal oxide is deposited on the surface of the substrate [3]. During the 
first half-cycle, the precursor is carried by inert gas and pulsed into the reactor with a 
determined duration, reacts with the available active sites of the substrate, and is chemi-
sorbed on the surface [5]. In this step, ideally, the precursor saturates the surface through 
a self-limiting reaction. Then, excess unreacted precursor molecules are purged out of the 
chamber using inert gas. In the second half-cycle, the co-reactant pulses into the reactor to 
react with the adsorbed precursor molecules on the substrate [7,8]. The common co-reac-
tants for ALD are water vapor, O 2, O3, and NH3 [9]. Finally, the excess co -reactant mole-
cules and the by -products of the reaction are purged out of the reactor. These two half -
cycles are repeated until the required film thickness and composition are achieved [10]. 
The schematic of an ALD cycle is presented in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic of each ALD cycle (Created with BioRender.com). 
The thin film deposition technique of ALD has a wide range of applications [3,5,9,10]. 
Some of the important applications of ALD include but are not limited to the following 
areas: semiconductor engineering [11–13], lithium-ion batteries [14–16], microelectrome-
chanical systems (MEMS) [17,18], capacitors [19,20], fuel cells [21–23], solar cells [24–26], 
transistors [27–29], drug delivery [30,31], medical and biomedical fields [32–35], dental 
materials [6,10], and orthopedical implants [36–38]. Due to the capability of precisely de-
positing conformal ultra -thin films, ALD has found a wide range of applications in the 
fabrication of microelectronics such as gate oxides, semiconductors, and ferroelectrics 
[12,39,40]. This techn ique has also attracted much attention in medical and biomedical 
applications, where organic substrates such as polymers or biomaterials are required 
[6,34,41]. 
Previous works have reviewed the important advantages and disadvantages of ALD 
[5,10,42,43]. Th e films produced by ALD are ultra -thin with exact controllability over 
thickness, composition, and crystallinity at the Å ngström level [4]. The films are also uni-
form, conformal, and pinhole-free across various substrates, even those with high aspect 
ratios or complex three-dimensional (3D) structures [43,44]. Additionally, many different 
metals, oxides, nitrides, sulfides, selenides, tellurides, fluorides, and metal–organic frame-
works (MOF s) can be deposited by ALD as long as the associated precursors exis t 
[3,9,10,42,45]. A wide range of temperatures can be used in ALD depending on different 
properties such as the nature of the materials involved and the final applications. ALD 
can produce high-quality films even at low substrate temperatures [46]. 
Being a slow process is one of the main drawbacks of ALD [3]. Depending on the 
conditions, a 100-nm thin film with thermal ALD would take around 20 h or more to de-
posit. Although spatial ALD (SALD) has been developed to overcome this drawback [47], 
it is a rather new tool and not always accessible. Moreover, SALD can be sensitive to am-
bient air if performed in open air, highly volatile precursors are needed for SALD, and , 
Figure 1. Schematic of each ALD cycle (Created with BioRender.com).
The thin ﬁlm deposition technique of ALD has a wide range of applications [3,5,9,10].
Some of the important applications of ALD include but are not limited to the following
areas: semiconductor engineering [11–13], lithium-ion batteries [14–16], microelectrome-
chanical systems (MEMS) [17,18], capacitors [19,20], fuel cells [21–23], solar cells [24–26],
transistors [27–29], drug delivery [ 30,31], medical and biomedical ﬁelds [ 32–35], dental
materials [6,10], and orthopedical implants [36–38]. Due to the capability of precisely de-
positing conformal ultra-thin ﬁlms, ALD has found a wide range of applications in the fabri-
cation of microelectronics such as gate oxides, semiconductors, and ferroelectrics [12,39,40].
This technique has also attracted much attention in medical and biomedical applications,
where organic substrates such as polymers or biomaterials are required [6,34,41].
Previous works have reviewed the important advantages and disadvantages of
ALD [5,10,42,43]. The ﬁlms produced by ALD are ultra-thin with exact controllability
over thickness, composition, and crystallinity at the Ångström level [ 4]. The ﬁlms are
also uniform, conformal, and pinhole-free across various substrates, even those with high
aspect ratios or complex three-dimensional (3D) structures [43,44]. Additionally, many dif-
ferent metals, oxides, nitrides, sulﬁdes, selenides, tellurides, ﬂuorides, and metal–organic
frameworks (MOFs) can be deposited by ALD as long as the associated precursors ex-
ist [3,9,10,42,45]. A wide range of temperatures can be used in ALD depending on different
properties such as the nature of the materials involved and the ﬁnal applications. ALD can
produce high-quality ﬁlms even at low substrate temperatures [46].
Being a slow process is one of the main drawbacks of ALD [ 3]. Depending on the
conditions, a 100-nm thin ﬁlm with thermal ALD would take around 20 h or more to deposit.
Although spatial ALD (SALD) has been developed to overcome this drawback [47], it is a
rather new tool and not always accessible. Moreover, SALD can be sensitive to ambient
air if performed in open air, highly volatile precursors are needed for SALD, and, still,
not many precursors for SALD exist [47]. Before each ALD experiment, all the conditions
should be determined to ﬁnd the optimized ones. Thus, for each ALD experiment, different
questions need to be answered:
• What would be the ﬁnal applications?
• What materials (i.e., precursor, oxidizer, and substrate) should be used?
• How long should the pulse and purge durations be to obtain a high-quality ﬁlm?
• What would be the growth rate based on the determined conditions?

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 3 of 25
• What should be the temperature and pressure of the reactor and the precursorbubblers?
• Are all the materials stable in those conditions?
Deciding on each of these factors requires many experiments to adjust the conditions
resulting in high-quality ﬁlms and an optimized growth rate. Moreover, each experiment
should be repeated a few times to validate the results and ensure the reproducibility of
the samples. On the other hand, the common precursors for ALD are often expensive,
and performing many experiments to tune the conditions is inefﬁcient. Additionally,
some of the mechanisms result in hazardous by-products, and it is preferred to reduce the
number of experiments. Theoretical modeling is one of the ways to ﬁnd optimal conditions
without performing any experiments, which would tremendously reduce the cost and time
associated with those experiments.
Recently, many research studies have used computer simulations and theoretical
models in conjunction with ALD for a variety of purposes, such as the study of thin ﬁlm
structure and composition and material selection [48]. The modeling technique varies over
multiple scales and is based on the interaction between atoms, molecules, particles, and
groups of atoms, also known as functional groups. Here, we present an overview of the
common theoretical methods used to model ALD and the insight that can be obtained
about the process of ALD from the different types of modeling. Thus, we adopt a reverse
engineering approach, where we deﬁne various aspects of ALD, describe the experimental
procedure used for ALD process development, and describe how modeling and simulation
have been used for a proper understanding and improvement of the ALD process. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. First, different aspects of ALD are brieﬂy introduced
and discussed, then the computational methods commonly used for modeling and simula-
tion of ALD are presented, and, ﬁnally, recent studies on theoretical approaches to ALD
are reviewed.
2. Aspects of ALD
Extensive experimental and theoretical research has so far been performed on different
aspects of ALD. Experimentalists often focused on one or some of the following areas:
precursors, mechanisms happening in an ALD reactor, and deposition characteristics such
as temperature window, saturating pulse and purge times, growth rate, composition,
morphology, and surface properties of the deposited ﬁlm. Since conventional ALD is a slow
process and due to the disadvantages of SALD mentioned above, many time-consuming
and expensive experiments are required to tune an ALD condition for desired applications.
Thus, not many of the areas mentioned above would be examined in a single research
study, and the researchers usually focus on a few of them when studying ALD systems.
2.1. ALD Precursors
An ALD precursor is often a metal surrounded by organic functional groups held in a
vessel known as a bubbler. The bubbler temperature in an ALD system varies depending
on the properties of the precursor. ALD precursors are volatile, thermally stable, and highly
reactive [49]. A few physical properties are considered when selecting a precursor for
an ALD study, such as materials of interest, reactivity toward the other co-reactant, ALD
conditions, ﬁnal applications, and desired ﬁlm properties (e.g., dielectric constant, adsorp-
tion capacity, gas impermeability, leakage current, electrical conductivity, photochemical
activity, and antimicrobial activity) [49–53].
Precursors should be able to react quickly with the active sites of the substrates
and other precursor molecules. Hence, precursor chemistry is a key factor in an ALD
process, which also affects the growth mechanisms. In recent years, the introduction
of new precursors has attracted much attention. Theoretical methods are appropriate
for designing new materials based on existing experimental data and predicting their
properties before synthesizing them [6]. Moreover, ﬁrst-principles calculations can be used
to suggest new materials with predicted properties that would be proved later through
experiments [39,54,55]. In addition, there is often the need to compare ALD precursors in

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 4 of 25
terms of various aspects that could become practically impossible through experimentation.
Theoretical approaches are useful for these purposes.
2.2. Deposition Characteristics
2.2.1. Growth
The growth rate in ALD is deﬁned as the thickness of the ﬁlm divided by the number
of cycles (nm/cycle) and depends on multiple factors, including the precursor ﬂux reaching
the substrate [ 5]. The growth rate is a prime factor in ALD studies since it provides a
direct method to understand the amount of time each deposition takes and predict the ﬁlm
thickness before deposition. Thus, the growth rate is often reported for each system under
study. In addition, the growth rate is affected by the reactor temperature and pressure,
pulse and purge times of the reactants, and the nature of the substrate. The growth rate is
often reported as a constant value (the slope of the plot showing ﬁlm thickness versus the
number of cycles); however, some studies reported that the growth rate might change over
the number of cycles. For instance, a recent study reported duo-linear plots of TiO2 ﬁlm
thickness versus the number of ALD cycles. According to them, absorbed water molecules
in pores of a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) substrate were released into the reactor
during the initial cycles, affecting the growth mechanism and resulting in a higher growth
rate compared with later deposition cycles (Figure 2) [6].
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 26 
 
 
adsorption capacity, gas impermeability, leakage current, electrical conductivity, photo-
chemical activity, and antimicrobial activity) [49–53]. 
Precursors should be able to react quickly with the active sites of the substrates and 
other precursor molecules. Hence, precursor chemistry is a key factor in an ALD process, 
which also affects the grow th mechanisms. In recent years, the introduction of new pre-
cursors has attracted much attention. Theoretical methods are appropriate for designing 
new materials based on existing experimental data and predicting their properties before 
synthesizing them [6]. Moreover, first-principles calculations can be used to suggest new 
materials with predicted properties that would be proved later through experiments 
[39,54,55]. In addition, there is often the need to compare ALD precursors in terms of var-
ious aspects that could become practically impossible through experimentation. Theoret-
ical approaches are useful for these purposes. 
2.2. Deposition Characteristics 
2.2.1. Growth 
The growth rate in ALD is defined as the thickness of the film divided by the number 
of cycles (nm/cycle) and depends on multiple factors, including the precursor flux reach-
ing the substrate [5]. The growth rate is a prime factor in ALD studies since it provides a 
direct method to understand the amount of time each deposition takes and predict the 
film thickness before deposition. Thus, the growth rate is often reported for each system 
under study. In addition, the growth rate is affected by the reactor temperature and pres-
sure, pulse and purge times of the reactants, and the nature of the substrate. The growth 
rate is often reported as a constant value ( the slope of the plot showing film thickness 
versus the number of cycles); however, some studies reported that the growth rate might 
change over the number of cycles. For instance, a recent study reported duo -linear plots 
of TiO2 film thickness versus the number of ALD cycles. According to them, absorbed 
water molecules in pores of a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) substrate were released 
into the reactor during the initial cycles, affecting the growth mechanism and resulting in 
a higher growth rate compared with later deposition cycles (Figure 2) [6]. 
 
Figure 2. Duo-linear plot of TiO2 film thickness versus the number of cycles and a silicon reference 
(reprinted with permission from [6]). 
Another aspect of ALD growth is the growth mode,  meaning how the materials are 
arranged on the surface of the substrate during ALD growth [56]. The ALD growth modes 
are mainly attributed to one of the following modes:  Volmer–Weber growth, Frank–van 
der Merwe growth, and Stranski–Krastanov growth [57,58]. In the Volmer–Weber growth 
mode, also known as island growth, small clusters or islands are first nucleated on the 
surface. The reason for island nucleation, in this case, is that the interaction of the adsorbed 
atoms within themselves is stronger compared with the interaction between the atoms 
Figure 2. Duo-linear plot of TiO2 ﬁlm thickness versus the number of cycles and a silicon reference
(reprinted with permission from [6]).
Another aspect of ALD growth is the growth mode, meaning how the materials are
arranged on the surface of the substrate during ALD growth [56]. The ALD growth modes
are mainly attributed to one of the following modes: Volmer–Weber growth, Frank–van
der Merwe growth, and Stranski–Krastanov growth [57,58]. In the Volmer–Weber growth
mode, also known as island growth, small clusters or islands are ﬁrst nucleated on the
surface. The reason for island nucleation, in this case, is that the interaction of the adsorbed
atoms within themselves is stronger compared with the interaction between the atoms
and the substrate. That is, the cohesive force within the atoms is stronger than the surface
adhesive force, so the atoms tend to accumulate. Then, those small clusters grow into larger
three-dimensional ones and reach each other, covering the whole surface [57].
On the other hand, in the Frank–van der Merwe growth mode, also known as bi-
dimensional growth, the surface adhesive force is stronger than the intra atom cohesive
force, leading to layer-by-layer growth on the substrate. That is, the atoms completely cover
the surface, producing a complete monolayer before the subsequent layer is formed on
top [59]. If both the Volmer–Weber and Frank–van der Merwe growth modes are combined,
the growth mode is called Stranski–Krastanov. In the Stranski–Krastanov growth mode,
which is the more common growth mode, the ﬁlm starts to form on the surface of the
substrate as a whole layer. After forming a rather thick ﬁlm, the growth mode switches to

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 5 of 25
island growth [58]. Where the transition happens is affected by the chemical and physical
properties of both ﬁlm and substrate materials [57–59]. Figure 3 presents a schematic of the
three growth modes.
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 26 
 
 
and the substrate. That is, the cohesive force within the atoms is stronger than the surface 
adhesive force, so the atoms tend to accumulate. Then, those small clusters grow into 
larger three-dimensional ones and reach each other, covering the whole surface [57]. 
On the other hand, in the Frank–van der Merwe growth mode, also known as bi -
dimensional growth, the surface adhesive force is stronger than the intra atom cohesive 
force, leading to layer -by-layer growth on the substrate. That is, the atoms completely 
cover the surface, producing a complete monolayer before the subsequent layer is formed 
on top [59]. If both the Volmer–Weber and Frank–van der Merwe growth modes are com-
bined, the growth mode is  called Stranski–Krastanov. In the Stranski–Krastanov growth 
mode, which is the more common growth mode, the film start s to form on the surface of 
the substrate as a whole layer. After forming a rather thick film, the growth mode switches 
to island growth [58]. Where the transition happens is affected by the chemical and phys-
ical properties of both film and substrate materials [57–59]. Figure 3 presents a schematic 
of the three growth modes. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic of common growth modes in ALD : (a) Volmer–Weber; (b) Frank–van der 
Merwe; and (c) Stranski–Krastanov. 
2.2.2. Surface Morphology 
Surface morphology is another characteristic of thin films usually examined and re-
ported in ALD -related studies. Different techniques , such as atomic force micros copy 
(AFM), profilometry, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) , are used to scan the sur-
face and provide three -dimensional images of surface topography. Surface morphology 
depends on many factors, including nucleation and growth mechanisms, growth rate, 
crystallinity, surface roughness, deposition conditions, substrate, and impurities [60,61]. 
2.2.3. Surface Roughness 
Another thin-film property that is often investigated in ALD studies is surface rough-
ness. Roughness is a part of surface texture, defined as a measure of waviness or irregu-
larities on the film surface. Mapping technologies such as AFM and optical or contact pro-
filometry can be used to calculate the surface roughness. The surface roughness is signif-
icantly affected by the growth mode discusse d earlier. For instance, the Volmer –Weber 
growth mode starts with island nucleation; the islands enlarge over time, and, most likely, 
their heights become larger than the thickness of one monolayer before they converge. 
Thus, if the growth follows the Volmer–Weber growth mode, the film is often made of 
rough layers. However, due to the layer -by-layer nature of the Frank–van der Merwe  
growth mode, smoother films are produced with this growth mode [57]. Aside from the 
growth modes, the surface roughness depends on other factors such as crystallinity, film 
thickness, and the nature of the substrate. 
2.2.4. Step Coverage (Conformality)  
Conformality can be defined as the deposition of a film with the same thickness on 
all topographic features, including the top, sides, and bottom surfaces of a three -dimen-
sional substrate [62]. Since deposition in ALD happens through surface -controlled reac-
tions, the thin films formed have excellent conformality. That is, the step coverage pro-
vided by ALD to the surface of complex structures  is higher than that of conventional 
deposition processes such as CVD and physical vapor deposition (PVD). Conformality is 
Figure 3. Schematic of common growth modes in ALD: (a) Volmer–Weber; (b) Frank–van der Merwe;
and (c) Stranski–Krastanov.
2.2.2. Surface Morphology
Surface morphology is another characteristic of thin ﬁlms usually examined and
reported in ALD-related studies. Different techniques, such as atomic force microscopy
(AFM), proﬁlometry, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), are used to scan the surface
and provide three-dimensional images of surface topography. Surface morphology depends
on many factors, including nucleation and growth mechanisms, growth rate, crystallinity,
surface roughness, deposition conditions, substrate, and impurities [60,61].
2.2.3. Surface Roughness
Another thin-ﬁlm property that is often investigated in ALD studies is surface rough-
ness. Roughness is a part of surface texture, deﬁned as a measure of waviness or irreg-
ularities on the ﬁlm surface. Mapping technologies such as AFM and optical or contact
proﬁlometry can be used to calculate the surface roughness. The surface roughness is sig-
niﬁcantly affected by the growth mode discussed earlier. For instance, the Volmer–Weber
growth mode starts with island nucleation; the islands enlarge over time, and, most likely,
their heights become larger than the thickness of one monolayer before they converge.
Thus, if the growth follows the Volmer–Weber growth mode, the ﬁlm is often made of
rough layers. However, due to the layer-by-layer nature of the Frank–van der Merwe
growth mode, smoother ﬁlms are produced with this growth mode [57]. Aside from the
growth modes, the surface roughness depends on other factors such as crystallinity, ﬁlm
thickness, and the nature of the substrate.
2.2.4. Step Coverage (Conformality)
Conformality can be deﬁned as the deposition of a ﬁlm with the same thickness on all
topographic features, including the top, sides, and bottom surfaces of a three-dimensional
substrate [62]. Since deposition in ALD happens through surface-controlled reactions, the
thin ﬁlms formed have excellent conformality. That is, the step coverage provided by ALD
to the surface of complex structures is higher than that of conventional deposition processes
such as CVD and physical vapor deposition (PVD). Conformality is a signiﬁcant aspect,
especially when there is a great desire to coat a complex three-dimensional nanostructured
surface or substrates with high aspect ratios [ 63]. Recently, Cremers et al. [63] provided
an extensive review of different aspects of our current knowledge about conformality in
ALD processes.
2.2.5. Deposition Temperature
In thermal ALD, the temperature is the main driving force for the process. One of the
terms in ALD studies is the temperature window, deﬁned as the temperature range over
which the self-controlled growth would occur at a constant rate. Inside the ALD window,
the growth rate would change signiﬁcantly with an increase in the temperature due to the
physisorption/condensation of precursors on the surface or low reaction rates, leading to
uncontrolled growth. At temperatures outside the ALD window, the precursor molecules
may decompose or desorb the heated substrate, resulting in uncontrolled growth [64]. The

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 6 of 25
typical temperature window for thermal ALD processes is 150–350 ◦C [5], although some
studies reported a temperature window out of this range. For instance, for the organic
and heat-sensitive substrates, the reactor temperature should be adjusted accordingly to
prevent the deformation and degradation of the substrate. Room temperature ALD has
been reported on collagen materials for biomaterial functionalization [34,65].
2.3. Thermal ALD Mechanisms
2.3.1. Mechanisms
As previously mentioned, a binary ALD process consists of a dose–purge–dose–purge
sequence of each reactant forming an ALD cycle. In thermal ALD, the surface reactions
typically happen due to a relatively high temperature. The self-limiting nature of ALD
allows for saturation to occur on the surface of the substrate during the dosage steps before
the extra unreacted materials are purged out of the reactor. That is, after the chemisorbed
species saturate all the available active sites, no more chemisorption would happen beyond
that point, although more reactants exist in the reactor [66]. However, the exact mechanisms
of ALD reactions remain sophisticated and challenging subjects. Nevertheless, some
studies have modeled and predicted ALD reaction mechanisms. The ALD mechanisms are
divided into three categories (initial surface reactions, reaction pathways, and precursor
decomposition), each of which is brieﬂy discussed below.
2.3.2. Initial Surface Reactions
A ﬁnite number of active sites are available on the surface of a substrate per each
ALD cycle. Through the initial surface reactions in an ALD process, those active sites
are occupied by the reactants and depleted at the end of each half-cycle, and then more
active sites are created in a subsequent halfcycle. The initial growth per cycle in ALD
depends on the number of nucleation sites and is categorized into three groups: linear,
surface-enhanced, and surface-inhibited [67].
2.3.3. Reaction Pathways
When describing the reaction pathways occurring in an ALD reactor, the formation
of aluminum oxide (Al 2O3) from trimethylaluminum (TMA) and water (H 2O) is well-
discussed. TMA acts as the aluminum precursor in that system, and water is the oxygen
source. The simpliﬁed forms of some of the common and well-known reaction pathways in
ALD processes are summarized and tabulated here (Table 1).
Table 1. Well-known ALD reaction pathways.
Thin
Film Precursor Co-Reactant Reaction Pathway Refs.
Al2O3 TMA a H2O –OH + AlMe3→–OAlMen + (3 −n) CH4
–AlMe + H2O →–AlOH + CH4
[62]
MO2 b MCl4 H2O
n (–OH) + MCl4 →(-O-)nMCl4−n + n HCl
(–O–)nMCl4−n + (4 −n) H2O →
(–O–)nM(OH)4−n + (4 −n) HCl
[68–70]
MO2 TDMAM c H2O M(NMe2)4 + 2 H2O →MO2 (solid)
+ 4 HNMe2
[71]
a TMA, trimethylaluminum; b M = Ti, Hf, Zr; c TDMAM, tetrakis(dimethylamido)metal (Ti, Hf, or Zr).
2.3.4. Precursor Chemisorption
Previous studies are focused on describing different mechanisms of precursor chemiso-
rption during an ALD process. These mechanisms are mainly categorized into three groups
(ligand exchange, dissociation, and association) [66,72]. In ligand exchange chemisorption,
the split of the precursor occurs on the surface, where its ligand is exchanged with a
surface group, and a gaseous product is released [66]. In the dissociation process, one or

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 7 of 25
more ligands of the precursors are separated from the molecule, bounded with the surface
groups, and create active sites on the substrate [66]. The molecule fragments are usually
separated due to an external source such as light or heat [ 72]. On the other hand, in the
association process, no ligand is split from the precursor, and a coordinated bond is formed
between the precursor and the surface active sites [66]. A schematic of these mechanisms
was reprinted from reference [73] and is shown in Figure 4.
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 26 
 
 
MO2 b MCl4 H2O 
n (–OH) + MCl4 → (-O-)nMCl4−n + n HCl 
(–O–)nMCl4-n + (4−n) H2O → (–
O–)nM(OH)4-n + (4−n) HCl 
[68–70] 
MO2 TDMAM c H2O M(NMe2)4 + 2 H2O → MO2 (solid) + 4 
HNMe2  [71] 
a TMA, trimethylaluminum; b M = Ti, Hf, Zr; c TDMAM, tetrakis(dimethylamido)metal (Ti, Hf, or 
Zr). 
2.3.4. Precursor Chemisorption 
Previous studies are focused on describing different mechanisms of precursor chem-
isorption during an ALD process. These mechanisms a re mainly categorized into three 
groups (ligand exchange, dissociation, and association) [66,72]. In ligand exchange chem-
isorption, the split of the precursor occurs on the surface, where its ligand is exchanged 
with a surface group, and a gaseous product is released [66]. In the dissociation process, 
one or more ligands of the precursors are separated from the molecule, bounded with the 
surface groups, and create active sites on the substrate [66]. The molecule fragments are 
usually separated due to an external source such as light or heat [72]. On the other hand, 
in the association process, no ligand is split from the precursor, and a coordinated bond 
is formed between the precursor and the surface active sites [66]. A schematic of these 
mechanisms was reprinted from reference [73] and is shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of the TMA reaction possibilities on oxide surfaces: ligand exchange 
with (a) one, (b) two, and (c) three OH groups; (d) dissociation; and (e) association (reprinted with 
permission from [73]). 
An example of ligand exchange precursor chemisorption is the Al2O3 ALD from TMA 
and H2O, the pathway of which is shown in Figure 4. During the first half -cycle of the 
reaction, TMA molecules chemisorb on a hydroxylated surface and react with the OH 
groups, where a ligand exchange occurs, and methane gas is released. After the surface is 
thoroughly saturated with the TMA molecules, all unreacted precursors and the by-prod-
ucts of the reactions are purged out. Water molecules enter the reactor in the second half-
reaction and react with the CH3-terminated surface sites. Again, the ligand exchange hap-
pens between the CH3 groups of chemisorbed TMA molecules, and OH groups of water 
vapor and methane gas are released until all the active sites are filled. Lastly, by-products 
and unreacted water molecules are pumpe d out of the reactor [62]. The surface is now 
hydroxylated again, and the steps are repeated. Another example of ligand -exchange 
ALD reactions is the deposition of metal oxides using alkoxide precursors [74]. ALD of 
metals such as copper, ruthenium, and platinum often occurs based on dissociation chem-
isorption [72,75]. The association mechanism is the hardest to identify since it usually hap-
pens after a gas -phase dissociation or before a ligan d-exchange reaction. A common ex-
ample is ALD from metal halide precursors[72]. 
  
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of the TMA reaction possibilities on oxide surfaces: ligand exchange
with (a) one, (b) two, and (c) three OH groups; (d) dissociation; and (e) association (reprinted with
permission from [73]).
An example of ligand exchange precursor chemisorption is the Al2O3 ALD from TMA
and H2O, the pathway of which is shown in Figure 4. During the ﬁrst half-cycle of the
reaction, TMA molecules chemisorb on a hydroxylated surface and react with the OH
groups, where a ligand exchange occurs, and methane gas is released. After the surface
is thoroughly saturated with the TMA molecules, all unreacted precursors and the by-
products of the reactions are purged out. Water molecules enter the reactor in the second
half-reaction and react with the CH3-terminated surface sites. Again, the ligand exchange
happens between the CH3 groups of chemisorbed TMA molecules, and OH groups of water
vapor and methane gas are released until all the active sites are ﬁlled. Lastly, by-products
and unreacted water molecules are pumped out of the reactor [ 62]. The surface is now
hydroxylated again, and the steps are repeated. Another example of ligand-exchange
ALD reactions is the deposition of metal oxides using alkoxide precursors [ 74]. ALD
of metals such as copper, ruthenium, and platinum often occurs based on dissociation
chemisorption [72,75]. The association mechanism is the hardest to identify since it usually
happens after a gas-phase dissociation or before a ligand-exchange reaction. A common
example is ALD from metal halide precursors [72].
3. Theoretical Methods
3.1. Density Functional Theory
Density Functional Theory (DFT) is one of the computational methods based on the
interaction between particles. DFT is used to investigate the electronic structure of many-
body systems by reducing a 3N-dimensional problem to N 3-dimensional problems. In
DFT, the structure of molecules may be predicted via the calculation of total energies and
forces [75]. There are several examples where DFT has been broadly used along with ALD.
DFT can be used to perform precursor design and comparison, predict ALD deposition
characteristics such as overall growth, predict activation barriers and transition states, and
determine reaction mechanisms such as initial surface reactions, reaction pathways, and
the precursor chemisorption process [48,76–80].
3.2. Microscopic or Atomic Modeling Scale: Molecular Dynamics
Molecular Dynamics (MD) can be used to simulate the interaction between parti-
cles [81]. In MD simulations, Newton’s equation of motion is integrated and numerically
solved for simulating the movement of atoms and molecules [5,82]. MD simulation is capa-

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 8 of 25
ble of studying rather large systems for a relatively long time and results in the trajectory
of the particles as a function of time [ 81]. For instance, when it comes to predicting the
reaction pathways or precursor chemisorption processes in ALD, MD simulation is another
method that is extremely helpful [75,83].
3.3. Lattice Boltzmann Method
The Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) is one of the methods used in Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD), which was introduced in the late 1980s and is used for ﬂuid
simulations [84,85]. LBM is categorized as being on the mesoscopic modeling scale, which
is appropriate for less complex systems as it needs less memory and has a short processing
time [86]. This method employs the Boltzmann equation to model a ﬂuid consisting of
ﬁctitious particles that are propagating and colliding [ 87]. LBM can be used along with
ALD to simulate the ﬂow of gases [86].
3.4. Off-Lattice Pseudo-Particle Method: Monte Carlo
Monte Carlo simulation is a stochastic computational technique to predict the prob-
ability of outcomes of various processes and obtain numerical results [88]. Monte Carlo
can be used to solve intractable analytical problems or substitute for time-consuming or
expensive experiments. Furthermore, researchers can employ this simulation technique to
explore different aspects or modify the conditions of an experiment [88]. Random-based
has a broad range of applications in ﬁnance, engineering, and science [89–92]. Monte Carlo
simulation has been extensively used along with ALD for different purposes, e.g., deter-
mining ﬁlm and precursor properties and the evolution of ﬁlm morphology, modeling ﬁlm
growth, and studying the kinetics of reactions and the mechanism of materials processing
in ALD [93–97]. Moreover, Kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulation, which accounts for
changes in the process with time, is invaluable in bridging the gap between individual
reaction data from DFT and average growth characteristics from experiments [97].
3.5. Group Contribution Method
The Group Contribution Method (GCM) can be employed to estimate the binary
interaction parameters between different groups of atoms [98] where there is no available
experimental data and can avoid the need for expensive experiments. In the GCM, the
thermodynamic properties of a compound are predicted from its molecular structure. For
this purpose, the molecule is split up into structural and functional groups composed of
individual atoms or small groups of atoms. The GCM parameter of a functional group is
estimated by the number of times a particular group appears on the adsorbent, multiplied
by its contribution [99]. The GCM can be employed to estimate the thermodynamic proper-
ties of precursors used in ALD. For instance, ALD precursor molecules can be divided into
smaller groups of atoms, and the GCM estimates the binary interaction parameters between
those groups. Then, the activity coefﬁcients of each group can be calculated based on those
interaction parameters. Our group recently reported the thermodynamic properties of
some well-known precursor molecules, which will be discussed in detail later [100,101].
3.6. Computer-Aided Molecular Design
Computer-Aided Molecular Design (CAMD) generates molecules with desired prop-
erties from functional groups using a reverse technique to that of the GCM. While the GCM
estimates the molecular properties based on the functional groups comprising the molecule,
CAMD, on the other hand, combines different functional groups to generate molecules
having desired properties [102]. CAMD methods have been applied extensively in var-
ious areas such as extraction solvents [ 103–108], polymer designs [ 109,110], degreasing
solvents [111], blanket wash solvents [ 112,113], absorption solvents [ 114–118], refriger-
ant design [ 119,120], distillation solvents [ 102,106,121,122], reaction solvents [ 123,124],
catalysts [124], value-added products [ 125], crystallization solvents [ 126], and foaming
agents [127]. CAMD has been used effectively to design novel clay-based adsorbents to

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 9 of 25
adsorb radioactive elements from ﬂowback/produced water [128] and remove arsenic from
water [129]. Mukherjee et al. [110] used CAMD to design a novel polymer resin for metal
ion removal from water. CAMD is also an appropriate method to be combined with ALD,
especially to design novel precursor materials, which will be discussed later on [100].
4. Theoretical Studies on ALD
In the previous sections, different aspects of ALD as well as theoretical methods to
study the ALD technique were brieﬂy discussed. In this section, the previous research
studies on theoretical ALD are reviewed. Table 2 summarizes the theoretical-study-only
ALD articles found in the Web of Science and covered in this review. It is worth mentioning
that this review mostly focuses on the theoretical-study-only ALD articles and does not
cover the combined experimental and theoretical ones, which are cited here [75,76,130–156].
Figure 5 displays the publications, summarized in Table 2, that are covered in this study.
Figure 5a illustrates the time evolution of publications on ALD studied with at least one of
the theoretical methods mentioned above. In this ﬁgure, the theoretical-study-only articles
are separated from the total set of articles, i.e., those that combine theory and experiments.
During the last six years, researchers have focused more on combining experimental ALD
studies with theory rather than performing a purely theoretical study. The reason most
likely lies within the greater desire to validate experimental data with a computational
model to establish their ALD method better. Figure 5b categorizes the publications based
on the regions those studies were performed in.
Table 2. Summary of the theoretical-study-only ALD articles.
Materials Aspect of Study Theoretical Method References
Al2O3
Introduce new precursor
Predict decomposition mechanism, chemisorption
process, growth rate, intermediates of the reaction and
their concentration, oxidizer reactivity, ﬁlm thickness,
and sticking coefﬁcients
Correlate growth rate quantitatively with hydroxyl
group concentrations
Simulate ﬁlm uniformity, roughness, density, atomic
ratio, gas ﬂow, temperature proﬁle, and
surface reactions
DFT; Mass balance; Monte
Carlo; CFD;
Numerical model/ANSYS
Fluent; MD
[73,78,83,93,96,157–165]
HfO2
Compare two precursors
Predict growth rate and mechanisms
Design novel precursors
Simulate gas ﬂow and temperature proﬁle
DFT; GCM/CAMD; CFD;
Monte Carlo
[70,74,79,100,162,166–
168]
TiO2
Compare halide precursors
Kinetics of reactions
Design novel precursors
Predict growth rate and mechanisms
DFT; GCM/CAMD [77,100,101,161,169,170]
ZrO2 Predict mechanisms and growth DFT [80,170–173]
ZnO Simulate growth rate and temperature dependency of
growth DFT/Monte Carlo [97]
Zr(Hf)O2
Predict temperature dependency of growth
rate (Kinetics) Monte Carlo [95]
Cu/CuO Introduce new precursor
Predict mechanisms and growth DFT [48,174–176]
Ru Compare reactions of precursors DFT [177]
Y2O3 Predict chemisorption process Mass balance [161]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 10 of 25
Table 2. Cont.
Materials Aspect of Study Theoretical Method References
SiC Introduce precursor DFT [178]
N/A
Simulate growth rate based on chemisorption process
Describe growth mode
Characterize carrier gas ﬂow
Model morphology evolution
Compare precursor exposure on 3D substrates
Predict cation ratios in ternary oxides
Mass balance; LBM Monte
Carlo; DFT [56,66,86,94,179,180]
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 26 
 
 
steric hindrance but, at the same time, a more distinct fraction of a monolayer during one 
cycle [145]. 
 
Figure 5. Illustration of the number of publications summarized in Table 2 categorized (a) per year 
between 2002 and 2021 and (b) per publication country. The search was performed with Web of 
Science using the following keywords: Atomic Layer Deposition and Theoretical. Irrelevant works 
were omitted and works combining experiments and theory are not covered in detail. 
Dey and Elliott [48] introduced a copper (I) carbene hydride using DFT calculations  
that acted both as a reducing agent and a precursor for Cu ALD. They proposed a Cu -
based reducing agent in case a co-deposition happened, which would be desirable as cop-
per was still deposited [48]. In addition to Cu ALD [48,75,174], other materials have been 
studied through DFT, e.g.,  platinum [148], aluminum oxide [76,146,147], hafnium oxide 
[74,166,167], titanium oxide [77,169], and zirconium oxide [80,171]. Another study used 
DFT to design an aluminum ALD precursor by substituting one methyl in TMA and se-
lectively decorating Pt nano particles by AlOx via ALD [76]. Yang et al. [76] showed that 
dimethylaluminum isopropoxide (DMAI) could be used as an ALD precursor, and they 
predicted the decomposition mechanism of DMAI with DFT [76]. Recently, Park et al. 
Figure 5. Illustration of the number of publications summarized in Table 2 categorized (a) per year
between 2002 and 2021 and ( b) per publication country. The search was performed with Web of
Science using the following keywords: Atomic Layer Deposition and Theoretical. Irrelevant works
were omitted and works combining experiments and theory are not covered in detail.
Figure 6a presents the percentage of articles on ALD thin ﬁlm materials studied with
theoretical methods. Most researchers have focused on Al2O3 thin ﬁlms presumably due

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 11 of 25
to the simple and well-understood reaction mechanism of TMA and water. In this ﬁgure,
the “others” section includes the theoretically studied ALD materials of yttrium oxide,
silicon oxide, and ruthenium. Figure 6b–d visually categorize the research articles based
on theoretical methods and ALD aspects (i.e., precursors, deposition characterization, and
reaction mechanisms, respectively).
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 26 
 
 
[166] compared two different hafnium precursors for ALD. DFT was used to predict that 
the cyclic precursor would result in a lower growth rate compared with the alkylamide 
precursor due to the low probability of final chemical adsorption of the bulky cyclic ligand 
on the surface [166]. 
 
Figure 6. Theoretical studies of ALD categorized based on the theoretical method and (a) thin film 
material and the ALD aspect under study, i.e., (b) precursors, (c) deposition characterization, and 
(d) reaction mechanisms. 
When a decision needs to be made between two similar precursors, DFT can be used 
to compare different ALD precursors without performing any experiments. For instance, 
halide precursors have been compared with regard to thermodynamics and kinetics [169]. 
Hu and Turner [169] compared TiI4 and TiCl4 from different aspects. Their results revealed 
that the difference in bond strength between Ti-I and Ti-Cl would not lead to a consider-
able change in the kinetics of their reactions with water. In contrast, different bond 
strengths significantly affected the reaction thermodynamics [169]. Without performing a 
single experiment, one would choose TiI4 over TiCl4 when a film with less impurity and a 
lower ALD temperature is more favored; for instance, TiI 4 would probably be a better 
precursor for TiO2 ALD on organic substrates compared with TiCl4. 
Recently, Shahmohammadi et al . [100] developed a theoretical method to design 
novel precursor materials for ALD. First, they developed a GCM model to predict the 
thermodynamic properties (i.e., activity coefficients) of the functional groups of already -
existing ALD precursor materials such a s tetrakis(dimethylamido)titanium (TDMAT), 
tetrakis (diethylamino) titanium (TDEAT), tetrakis (diethylamino) hafnium (TDEAH), 
and tetrakis (ethylmethylamino) hafnium (TEMAH). Then, using the estimated activity 
coefficients of those groups, they formulated a CAMD framework to optimally design 
novel precursor materials for ALD. Compared with the commercially available precur-
sors, the most optimal designed precursors were predicted to have a ~40% increase in the 
ALD growth rate [100]. The same GCM model was employed to quantify the water impu-
rity in an ALD reactor, which will be discussed in the next section [101]. 
Figure 6. Theoretical studies of ALD categorized based on the theoretical method and (a) thin ﬁlm
material and the ALD aspect under study, i.e., (b) precursors, (c) deposition characterization, and
(d) reaction mechanisms.
4.1. Precursors
First-principles theoretical methods can be used to select and optimize ALD precursors
given any conditions. For instance, no experimental condition for ALD of silicon carbide
(SiC) was known when Filatova et al. [178] performed DFT calculations to introduce the
most promising precursors for this ALD system. They predicted that the combinations of
disilane (Si2H6), silane (SiH4), or monochlorosilane (SiH3Cl) with ethyne (C2H2), carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4), or trichloromethane (CHCl3) would be the most promising materials
for ALD of SiC at 400◦C. As of then, SiC was only deposited via high-temperature CVD, and
that was how they validated their method [178]. Therefore, those materials and conditions
for ALD were proposed without performing a single experiment, saving a huge amount of
time and energy. Thus, theoretical techniques can be used in a stand-alone manner without
experiments, making them very powerful methods.
In 2014, Jung et al. [145] studied a newly synthesized zirconium precursor for ZrO2
ALD on silicon and compared their results with a commonly used zirconium precursor.
Aside from exploring the properties of the precursor and ﬁlm growth, they performed
DFT to examine the initial growth mechanism of ZrO2 on hydroxylated silicon. According
to their DFT calculations, the new precursor would result in a lower growth rate due to
steric hindrance but, at the same time, a more distinct fraction of a monolayer during one
cycle [145].
Dey and Elliott [48] introduced a copper (I) carbene hydride using DFT calculations
that acted both as a reducing agent and a precursor for Cu ALD. They proposed a Cu-
based reducing agent in case a co-deposition happened, which would be desirable as

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 12 of 25
copper was still deposited [48]. In addition to Cu ALD [ 48,75,174], other materials have
been studied through DFT, e.g., platinum [ 148], aluminum oxide [ 76,146,147], hafnium
oxide [74,166,167], titanium oxide [77,169], and zirconium oxide [80,171]. Another study
used DFT to design an aluminum ALD precursor by substituting one methyl in TMA and
selectively decorating Pt nanoparticles by AlO x via ALD [ 76]. Yang et al. [ 76] showed
that dimethylaluminum isopropoxide (DMAI) could be used as an ALD precursor, and
they predicted the decomposition mechanism of DMAI with DFT [ 76]. Recently, Park
et al. [166] compared two different hafnium precursors for ALD. DFT was used to predict
that the cyclic precursor would result in a lower growth rate compared with the alkylamide
precursor due to the low probability of ﬁnal chemical adsorption of the bulky cyclic ligand
on the surface [166].
When a decision needs to be made between two similar precursors, DFT can be used
to compare different ALD precursors without performing any experiments. For instance,
halide precursors have been compared with regard to thermodynamics and kinetics [169].
Hu and Turner [169] compared TiI4 and TiCl4 from different aspects. Their results revealed
that the difference in bond strength between Ti-I and Ti-Cl would not lead to a considerable
change in the kinetics of their reactions with water. In contrast, different bond strengths
signiﬁcantly affected the reaction thermodynamics [ 169]. Without performing a single
experiment, one would choose TiI4 over TiCl4 when a ﬁlm with less impurity and a lower
ALD temperature is more favored; for instance, TiI4 would probably be a better precursor
for TiO2 ALD on organic substrates compared with TiCl4.
Recently, Shahmohammadi et al. [ 100] developed a theoretical method to design
novel precursor materials for ALD. First, they developed a GCM model to predict the
thermodynamic properties (i.e., activity coefﬁcients) of the functional groups of already-
existing ALD precursor materials such as tetrakis(dimethylamido)titanium (TDMAT),
tetrakis (diethylamino) titanium (TDEAT), tetrakis (diethylamino) hafnium (TDEAH),
and tetrakis (ethylmethylamino) hafnium (TEMAH). Then, using the estimated activity
coefﬁcients of those groups, they formulated a CAMD framework to optimally design
novel precursor materials for ALD. Compared with the commercially available precursors,
the most optimal designed precursors were predicted to have a ~40% increase in the ALD
growth rate [100]. The same GCM model was employed to quantify the water impurity in
an ALD reactor, which will be discussed in the next section [101].
4.2. Deposition Characterization
Different theoretical models can be used to describe the growth rate in ALD. In 2003,
Puurunen [66] derived a mathematical model based on mass balance to describe ALD
growth rate as a function of growth chemistry. The chemistry of growth was deﬁned as
the size of the reactants and their chemisorption mechanism on the substrate. Using that
model, if the size of the ligands is known, one can simulate the growth per cycle from any
compound with a certain chemisorption mechanism. The chemisorption processes of ligand
exchange, association, and dissociation were theoretically described for the adsorption
of the precursor on the substrate. It was found that either a steric hindrance or a limited
number of active sites on the substrate causes surface saturation. According to the author,
the steric hindrance of ligands would lead to the growth rate being less than a monolayer
per cycle [ 66]. In another article, the same model was applied to three ALD systems,
i.e., Al2O3 from TMA and H2O, Yttrium oxide (Y2O3) from Y(thd)3 and O3 (thd = 2,2,6,6-
tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedionate), and TiO2 from TiCl4 and H2O. Based on that report, the
ligand exchange would occur with all OH groups in the TMA/H2O process and with one
or more OH groups in the Y(thd)3/O3 and TiCl4/H2O processes. Moreover, in all three
systems, the steric hindrance of ligands likely deﬁned the saturation [ 161]. A year later,
the same author theoretically described random deposition as an ALD growth mode [56].
According to that research, random deposition and the growth rate value related the surface
coverage to the surface fractions and the coverage of different layers. The surface fraction

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 13 of 25
was deﬁned as the difference between coverages of a layer and the previous layer, whereas
the sum of those fractions resulted in the surface coverage [56].
Murray and Elliott [180] performed a comprehensive DFT investigation on ALD from
17 different metal precursors. Using hydrolysis models, they were able to predict the
reactivity and stoichiometry of metal cation ratios in a variety of ternary oxides grown by
ALD [180]. In another article, Elliot [78] developed a theoretical framework based on DFT to
predict the growth rate and the intermediates of the reaction as well as their concentration
in an Al 2O3 ALD system. The well-known TMA and water system was employed for
that study. The DFT analysis was performed with respect to the surface coverage of the
intermediates, such as CH3 and H, and the effect of temperature as a processing condition
was studied. According to the author, the higher processing temperature caused a higher
concentration of hydrogen intermediates, reducing the growth rate. In addition, the lower
temperature limited the mobility of hydrogen atoms, which decreased the growth rate in
the system of that study [78].
In another TMA/water study by Puurunen [73], the growth rate was shown to quanti-
tatively correlate to the concentration of hydroxyl groups on the surface before the TMA
reaction. Based on the results of that study, the correlation parameters depended on the
precursor chemisorption and steric hindrance [73]. The temperature dependency of the
growth rate was also discussed in Puurunen’s study, where the temperature effect was
related to the concentration of hydroxyl groups on the surface. As the substrate temperature
increased, the concentration of surface hydroxyl groups decreased, which in turn reduced
the growth rate [73]. The ﬁnding was in agreement with the previously discussed study
by Elliot [78]. Both of those studies considered Al2O3 ALD using TMA and water, while,
recently, Seo et al. [163] employed DFT to study the effect of different oxidizers (i.e., H2O2
and O3) reacting with TMA. According to their results, the molecular reactivity toward ALD
of Al2O3 on a CH-terminated surface at low deposition temperatures for the three oxidizing
agents was expected to be H2O < H2O2 < O3. Moreover, one H2O molecule was required
to complete the reaction, whereas this number for both O3 and H2O2 was 2 [163]. DFT was
used in another research study to investigate ALD-grown copper oxide nanoclusters on a
porphyrin, supporting their similar reactivity characteristics with Cu-exchanged zeolites
toward direct methane-to-methanol oxidation in a stepped conversion process [175].
One of the well-established numerical techniques extensively used in different areas
is Monte Carlo simulation. Monte Carlo simulation was previously performed to explain
ALD ﬁlm growth in nanopores [ 96]. In that study, uniform ﬁlm growth was observed
up to 75 cycles, beyond which the ﬁlm grew non-uniformly. At higher cycles, a thicker
ﬁlm was observed at the pore edge compared with the pore center, which was attributed
to increasing the resistance to precursor diffusion at the pore mouth and the precursor
depletion in the central regions with increasing the cycle numbers [96]. In 2018, Weckman
et al. [97] performed a comprehensive study on the overall growth and surface chemistry
of ZnO ALD by implementing a DFT calculation into a kMC model. According to the
authors, the temperature dependency of ﬁlm growth was in agreement with experimental
data, while the growth rate per cycle was overestimated with simulation. Based on their
report, the ﬁlm growth in the reported system was low at lower temperatures, which was
attributed to the high activation energy required to eliminate ethyl ligands of the precursor,
which in turn caused impurities in the ﬁlm. However, those barriers would be overcome at
higher temperatures, resulting in a higher growth rate [97].
Moreover, the gas ﬂow and temperature proﬁle in ALD have been studied experi-
mentally and theoretically. Burgess et al. [162] used CFD codes to simulate the gas ﬂow
and temperature proﬁle in the AL2O3 and HfO2 ALD systems. They employed quantum
calculations to identify reaction pathways and energies in both systems [ 162]. The gas
ﬂow and surface reactions in Al 2O3 ALD using TMA and water were studied using 3D
transient numerical models. The predicted growth rate under different ALD conditions
(i.e., temperature and precursor purging time) was compared with experimental values.
Slightly higher growth rates were predicted compared with the experimental results. The

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 14 of 25
longer purge times at lower temperatures would result in closer agreement between the
experimental and predicted growth rates. One interesting observation of that work was
that the growth rate was dependent on the location of the sample in their ALD reactor,
and the samples near the inlet of the reactor had a higher growth rate than those near
the outlet [ 149]. Although their results showed good agreement between experiments
and simulations, they only considered one full ALD cycle in their numerical study. A
previous study suggested that after a speciﬁc number of ALD cycles where a rather thick
ﬁlm is formed, the growth mechanism and the growth rate may change since the effect
of the substrate is diminished [6]. Pan et al. [86] compared two common LBM models to
characterize the carrier gas ﬂow in ALD: the lattice Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook (LBGK) and
two-relaxation-time (TRT) models. According to their results, the TRT model was more
reliable regarding stability, while the LBGK model was better in terms of computational
efﬁciency [86].
Monte Carlo simulation is also applicable in implementing the kinetics of ALD. For
example, Deminsky et al. [ 95] performed kMC simulation to study the temperature de-
pendency of the growth rate and reported its slight decrease between 200 and 600 ◦C
in Zr(Hf)O 2 ALD. The observed temperature dependency of the growth rate was re-
ported to be in agreement with experimental data and due to the steric repulsion between
chemisorbed groups and adsorbed precursor molecules [95]. This is in line with another
work, where the researchers used CAMD to design novel precursor materials for ALD, and
the predicted growth rates displayed temperature dependency [100].
The morphology evolution of the ﬁlms produced by ALD can be modeled and studied
through Monte Carlo simulation. In a previous study, amorphous ﬁlms deposited by ALD
were examined with Monte Carlo simulation [94]. Based on the results, steric hindrance
would delay the linear growth [ 94]. In addition, 3D Monte Carlo simulation has been
used to determine the ﬁlm thickness and sticking coefﬁcients of TMA and bis-diethyl
aminosilane (BDEAS) precursors in high-aspect-ratio 3D substrates [93]. In another work,
Cremers et al. [179] reported the results of 3D Monte Carlo simulation in ALD on different
large geometries, i.e., pillars versus holes. According to the authors, much less precursor
exposure is needed for conformal ALD on pillars than holes, which, as a result, makes
arrays of pillars more appropriate for ALD [179].
A recent report from the authors employed the GCM and ASST to quantify the
impurity in an ALD reactor [101] reported earlier. When PMMA and a silicon reference
were present in the same ALD reactor, the TiO 2 growth rate on silicon was higher than
stand-alone silicon. This elevated growth rate had been observed experimentally and was
attributed to the released water molecules from PMMA pores [ 6]. With the help of the
theoretical methods, the precise amount of water vapor from PMMA was calculated and
conﬁrmed the previously reported hypothesis. The predicted growth rate on the silicon
reference was in agreement with the experimental data. The model also showed that the
moles of water molecules acting as the second co-reactant of ALD decreased with increasing
the number of ALD cycles [101]. This decreasing trend had been observed with experiments
as well [6].
4.3. Mechanisms
The reaction mechanism happening in the Al2O3 ALD system using TMA and water
has been studied theoretically to determine thermodynamically favorable pathways at
various stages of ALD [157–159,164,165]. DFT cluster models have been used to predict re-
action energetics and transition state structures for adsorption and a single ligand exchange
during both the TMA and water half-reactions. Both half-cycle reactions are reported to
be exothermic, happening through the formation of an Al–O Lewis acid–base complex
followed by CH4 formation [164]. Another article was focused on atomic-scale models to
investigate the reaction steps involved in the growth of Al2O3 ALD, especially precursor
adsorption and by-product elimination [165]. Recently, reaction mechanisms between TMA

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 15 of 25
and O3 were investigated using DFT. Some plausible intermediates of those reactions were
found to be methoxy, formate, bicarbonate, and hydroxyl intermediates [160].
The dissociation of water molecules, when adsorbed on the substrate, hydroxylates
the surface. Thus, when studying reaction mechanisms, the OH groups should be con-
sidered. DFT is used to study in detail energetics of the initial reaction pathways on the
hydroxylated surface during the TMA pulse. TMA is reported to adsorb exothermically
on the surface, reacting with the hydroxylated Al 2O3 surface through ligand exchange
reactions [157]. Travis and Adomaitis [158] used existing energetics data to determine ki-
netic parameters using statistical thermodynamics and absolute reaction rate theory. They
presented a surface reaction kinetics and ﬁlm growth model for the TMA half-reactions of
Al2O3 ALD on a range of surfaces from bare to full hydroxylated states. According to their
results, the reaction pathway differed if the surface was bare or hydroxylated, and maxi-
mum ALD growth only occurred at an initially saturating hydroxyl group density [158].
Brown et al. [83] performed MD on Al2O3 ALD, focusing on dissociation reactions. Based
on their results, the studied variables, such as growth rate and surface roughness, were
in close agreement with the experimentally reported values. However, the previous stud-
ies that only considered the ligand exchange reactions achieved less agreement with the
experimental data [181].
Metal alkoxides were reported to be used as both hafnium and oxygen precursors in
ALD. Mui and Musgrave [74] predicted the chemical mechanism of HfO2 ALD using DFT
calculations, in which they examined Tetraethoxyl Hafnium (Hf(OEt)4) as both a precursor
and an oxidizer. They studied different reaction pathways that would affect the ALD
growth rate. According to the authors, incomplete surface elimination most likely led to
carbon contamination and competed kinetically with the ligand exchange half-reactions.
Additionally, the use of Hf(OEt) 4 as the oxygen precursor was not advantageous as it
violated the self-limiting characteristic of ALD [ 74]. The halide hafnium precursor was
used in another work to examine the mechanisms of half-reactions happening in HfO2 ALD.
It was reported that the adsorption energy and the preferred adsorption sites for metal
precursors depended on the water coverage. That is, increasing the water coverage would
lead to higher interaction between the metal precursor and multiple surface adsorption
sites [167]. Another study reported the effect of cluster size on the formation of the HfCl4
complex during the precursor half-reaction [70].
The densiﬁcation process in HfO2 ALD on SiO2 was studied through combined DFT
and kMC [168]. The introduced possible densiﬁcation reactions, which impacted growth
evolution, were nucleation, the “inter-side” reaction, and the “on-site” reaction. The authors
compared the simulation results of surface coverage to the experimental data up to 10 ALD
cycles. They concluded that considering the densiﬁcation reactions was the only condition
that caused the agreement with experiments [168]. A year later, another group used DFT to
study the reactions happening in HfO2 ALD [79]. They reported a detailed mechanism for
that ALD system from tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium and water. Based on calculated
activation energies, multiple proton diffusions from the surface to amide ligands and
rotation of the protonated amine are more energetically favorable than ligand elimination
in the initial stage. Thus, multiple proton diffusions to the amide ligands happen before
the protonated amine ligands desorb. When the precursor was adsorbed on the surface,
multiple protons diffused to amine ligands. That freed up hafnium to bond with oxygen,
which had already been freed due to protonation and desorption of ligands and become
ﬁve-coordinated. Then, hafnium became four-coordinated upon further ligand elimination.
Hafnium became more highly coordinated as more ligands were eliminated, forming bonds
with more oxygens and causing densiﬁcation. The remaining ligands exchanged with
hydroxyl groups during the water pulse, preparing the surface for the next precursor
pulse [79].
Hu and Turner [77] employed DFT to investigate, in detail, the initial surface reactions
of TiO2 ALD from TiCl4 and water. They studied different reactive groups of the SiO 2
surface as the substrate, i.e., isolated hydroxyl groups, adjacent hydrogen-bonded hydroxyl

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 16 of 25
groups, and surface oxygen bridges. According to their report, all the investigated surfaces
were reactive toward TiCl4, where different intermediate species with different activation
barriers were formed on each surface [77]. Later on, DFT was employed to compare the
initial growth mechanisms in ALD of TiO2 and ZrO2 on SiOH surfaces using cyclohepta-
trienyl (CHT)–cyclopentadienyl (Cp) precursors [170,172]. According to the authors’ DFT
calculations, the reactions happened through similar pathways in both metal oxides, where
one hydrogen atom from the surface was transferred to the precursor ligand (Figure 7,
reprinted with permission from reference [170]). However, the Zr precursor adsorption
was exothermic and thus energetically favorable, whereas that of the Ti precursor was
endothermic and thermodynamically unfavorable. The authors reported this difference to
be a reason why an ALD window had been experimentally observed for ZrO2 growth and
not for TiO2 growth [170]. The same researchers proposed initial reaction pathways for an
ansa-metallocene Zr precursor ((Cp2CMe2)ZrMe2), where the steric hindrance of the large
ligand prevented the reaction from occurring through chemisorption, and it happened due
to the dispersion effect of the bulky ligand [173].
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 26 
 
 
evolution, were nucleation, the “inter-side” reaction, and the “on-site” reaction. The au-
thors compared the simulation results of surface coverage to the experimental data up to 
10 ALD cycles. They concluded that considering the densification reactions was the only 
condition that caused the agreement with experiments [168]. A year later, another group 
used DFT to study the reactions happening in HfO 2 ALD [79]. They reported a detailed 
mechanism for that ALD system from tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium and water. Based 
on calculated activation energies, multiple proton diffusions from the surface to amide 
ligands and rotation of the protonated amine are more energetically favorable than ligand 
elimination in the initial stage. Thus, multiple proton diffusions to the amide ligands hap-
pen before the protonated amine ligands desorb. When the precursor was adsorbed on 
the surface, multiple protons diffused to amine ligands. That freed up hafnium to bond 
with oxygen, which had already been freed due to protonation and desorption of ligands 
and become five-coordinated. Then, hafnium became four-coordinated upon further lig-
and elimination. Hafnium became more highly coordinated as more ligands were elimi-
nated, forming bonds with more oxygens and causing densification. The r emaining lig-
ands exchanged with hydroxyl groups during the water pulse, preparing the surface for 
the next precursor pulse [79]. 
Hu and Turner [77] employed DFT to investigate, in detail, the initial surface reac-
tions of TiO2 ALD from TiCl4 and water. They studied different reactive groups of the SiO2 
surface as the substrate, i.e., isolated hydroxyl groups, adjacent hydrogen -bonded hy-
droxyl groups, and surface oxygen bridges. According to their report, all the investigated 
surfaces were reactive toward TiC l4, where different intermediate species with different 
activation barriers were formed on each surface [77]. Later on, DFT was employed to com-
pare the initial growth mechanisms in ALD of TiO2 and ZrO2 on SiOH surfaces using cy-
cloheptatrienyl (CHT)–cyclopentadienyl (Cp) precursors [170,172]. According to the au-
thors’ DFT calculations, the reactions happened through similar pathways in both metal 
oxides, where one hydrogen atom from the surface was transferred to the precursor ligand 
(Figure 7, reprinted with permission from reference [170]). However, the Zr precursor ad-
sorption was exothermic and thus energetically favorable, whereas that of the Ti precursor 
was endothermic and thermodynamically unfavorable. The  authors reported this differ-
ence to be a reaso n why an ALD window had been experimentally observed for ZrO 2 
growth and not for TiO 2 growth [170]. The same researchers proposed initial reaction 
pathways for an ansa-metallocene Zr precursor ((Cp2CMe2)ZrMe2), where the steric hin-
drance of the large ligand prevented the reaction from occurring through chemisorption, 
and it happened due to the dispersion effect of the bulky ligand [173]. 
 
Figure 7. Surface reactions of Cp MeZr(CHT) and CpTi(CHT) on the SiOH surface ( reprinted with 
permission from reference [170]). 
Figure 7. Surface reactions of CpMeZr(CHT) and CpTi(CHT) on the SiOH surface (reprinted with
permission from reference [170]).
Han et al. [171] studied the initial growth mechanisms in ZrO2 ALD on hydroxylated
SiO2 substrates by DFT. The intermediate complexes formed after each half-reaction of
ZrCl4 and water were similar to the ones shown in Table 1. Furthermore, they reported that
increasing the temperature would increase the precursor desorption and sub-monolayer
growth. Another research study was performed on a similar system. Cui and Ren [ 80]
investigated fourteen possible pathways of chlorine loss reactions in ZrO 2 ALD using
ZrCl4 and water through DFT. They reported that the HCl by-product did not prefer to
self-eliminate throughout the process. Thus, eliminating chloride contaminations should
be considered in that ALD system. Moreover, they discussed temperature effects on
chlorine loss reactions, where the self-elimination of HCl was the dominant pathway at a
lower temperature. At elevated temperatures, although the self-elimination of HCl was
still favorable, hydrolysis was the dominant pathway due to the decrease in hydroxyl
groups [80].
In addition to metal oxides, the mechanisms happening in metal ALD have also
been investigated through DFT. For instance, Karasulu et al. [148] investigated platinum
ALD on graphene using DFT. As a result, they were able to minimize the experimental
procedures for process development and revealed that graphene oxide is an effective seed
layer to obtain a uniform continuous Pt thin ﬁlm. Ab initio DFT MD simulations were
also helpful for investigating the thermal stability of simulation models [ 148]. Another
interesting study used DFT to compare the reactions of two precursors in ruthenium
ALD on different ruthenium surfaces [177]. The authors’ comparison between reactions
on various substrates proved that a surface with a high surface energy and a complex

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 17 of 25
topology, i.e., a surface with more defective sites for the adsorption and reaction, was the
best substrate for ALD. Moreover, the presence of hydrogen atoms on the surface would
prevent precursor adsorption [177].
In 2015, Hu et al. [ 75] studied the ALD of Copper(II) acetylacetonate (Cu(acac) 2)
on Cu(110) substrates, and investigated initial surface reactions of the copper precursor
through DFT calculations and reactive molecular dynamics (RMD) simulations. Based on
their results, the dissociation of Cu(acac)2 easily happened on Cu atoms, while the acac
ligand could dissociate on both copper and copper oxide surfaces. Their DFT calculations
revealed the sequential dissociation and reduction of the Cu(acac)2 precursor on the copper
substrate (Cu(acac)2-Cu(acac)-Cu), which was in line with the reaction pathways they ob-
served through RMD. Their RMD simulations revealed that the copper-rich surfaces were
more reactive toward the precursor’s decomposition. They also reported that the atomic
hydrogen was more reactive toward the precursors with hydrocarbon ligands than ozone
or water as co-reactants [ 75]. Two years later, the mechanisms of metal ALD chemistry
on an atomic scale were investigated through DFT [ 174]. The work by Elliot et al. [ 174]
supported the reduction of a Cu(acac) 2 precursor on Cu substrates, which had been re-
ported earlier [75]. Another DFT study investigated the transmetalation reactions as the
mechanism for Cu ALD using diethylzinc (ZnEt2) as the reducing agent [176]. The most
thermodynamically favorable gas-phase reactions in both the precursor and co-reagent
pulses are presented in Figure 8 (reprinted from reference [176]). The letter L in Figure 8
refers to the ligands of the reagents, meaning the reactions were generalized for commonly
used Cu precursors, irrespective of which was used, while copper dimethyl-2-propoxide
(Cu(dmap)2) was reported to be the best one [176].
Nanomaterials 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 26 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Flowcharts depicting possible ALD mechanisms for (a) a precursor pulse and (b) a reduc-
ing-agent pulse. Rectangular shapes denote starting reagents and end produ cts, and slanted boxes 
denote intermediates. The upward arrows represent desorption of volatile species ( reprinted with 
permission from [176]). 
5. Summary, Insights, and Future Challenges 
In this review, all theoretical methods that have been employed so far to study ALD 
are discussed. The fundamental and ab initio (first-principles) techniques such as DFT are 
used to predict atomic behavior at the micro-level. These methods provide detailed infor-
mation on atomic interactions without  depending on experiments since they do not re-
quire initial data to be obtained. However, they are time-consuming and can become very 
expensive. On the contrary, macro -level methods such as CAMD are much faster and 
more cost -efficient than the aforemention ed ones. These methods predict the optimal 
chemical molecules based on information about building blocks (functional groups) rather 
than atoms and can be used for reverse engineering. However, the main drawback of these 
techniques is the necessity of experimental data. For instance, one would need the prop-
erties of groups of molecules to use CAMD, requiring experimental data. Thus, whenever 
there is a lack of experimental data, the  ab initio methods are useful, but if the experi-
mental data are available, it would be more efficient to use reverse engineering methods. 
Most of the researchers have so far focused on varying the operating temperature to 
theoretically predict the growth, film properties, and reaction mechanisms in an ALD sys-
tem. However, the temperature is not the only factor affecting ALD reactions. Other fac-
tors, such as the substrate, gas flow, reactor design, and adsorbate–adsorbate and adsorb-
ate–adsorbent interactions, affect the predicted mechanisms happening in ALD reactions. 
Those factors may be varied through computational methods to better predict the behav-
ior of different ALD process es. In addition, most of the theoretical research articles o n 
ALD so far have focused on the processes on inorganic substrates. However, since more 
and more experimental ALD studies are being performed on organic substrates, such as 
polymers and biomaterials, the actual growth behavior and reaction mechanisms on these 
materials are largely unknown. Due to the nature of organic materials, it would be highly 
complicated and challenging to predict the growth behavior, thin film characteristics, and 
Figure 8. Flowcharts depicting possible ALD mechanisms for (a) a precursor pulse and (b) a reducing-
agent pulse. Rectangular shapes denote starting reagents and end products, and slanted boxes denote
intermediates. The upward arrows represent desorption of volatile species (reprinted with permission
from [176]).

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 18 of 25
5. Summary, Insights, and Future Challenges
In this review, all theoretical methods that have been employed so far to study ALD are
discussed. The fundamental and ab initio (ﬁrst-principles) techniques such as DFT are used
to predict atomic behavior at the micro-level. These methods provide detailed information
on atomic interactions without depending on experiments since they do not require initial
data to be obtained. However, they are time-consuming and can become very expensive. On
the contrary, macro-level methods such as CAMD are much faster and more cost-efﬁcient
than the aforementioned ones. These methods predict the optimal chemical molecules
based on information about building blocks (functional groups) rather than atoms and
can be used for reverse engineering. However, the main drawback of these techniques is
the necessity of experimental data. For instance, one would need the properties of groups
of molecules to use CAMD, requiring experimental data. Thus, whenever there is a lack
of experimental data, the ab initio methods are useful, but if the experimental data are
available, it would be more efﬁcient to use reverse engineering methods.
Most of the researchers have so far focused on varying the operating temperature
to theoretically predict the growth, ﬁlm properties, and reaction mechanisms in an ALD
system. However, the temperature is not the only factor affecting ALD reactions. Other
factors, such as the substrate, gas ﬂow, reactor design, and adsorbate–adsorbate and
adsorbate–adsorbent interactions, affect the predicted mechanisms happening in ALD
reactions. Those factors may be varied through computational methods to better predict the
behavior of different ALD processes. In addition, most of the theoretical research articles
on ALD so far have focused on the processes on inorganic substrates. However, since more
and more experimental ALD studies are being performed on organic substrates, such as
polymers and biomaterials, the actual growth behavior and reaction mechanisms on these
materials are largely unknown. Due to the nature of organic materials, it would be highly
complicated and challenging to predict the growth behavior, thin ﬁlm characteristics, and
reaction mechanisms on those substrates. We hope to see such interesting studies from
theoreticians in the future to better assist in the design of experiments in those ﬁelds.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.S. and R.M.; investigation, M.S.; resources, C.G.T.;
writing—original draft preparation, M.S.; writing—review and editing, R.M., C.S., U.M.D., C.G.T.;
visualization, M.S.; supervision, U.M.D., C.G.T.; project administration, U.M.D., C.G.T.; funding
acquisition, C.G.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was partially funded by National Science Foundation (NSF 1309114).
Acknowledgments: Partial support by the National Science Foundation, NSF 1309114, is gratefully
acknowledged. Figure 1 was created with BioRender.com.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Ritala, M.; Leskelä, M. Chapter 2—Atomic layer deposition. In Handbook of Thin Films; Singh Nalwa, H.B.T.-H., Ed.; Academic
Press: Burlington, VT, USA, 2002; pp. 103–159. ISBN 978-0-12-512908-4.
2. Puurunen, R.L. A short history of atomic layer deposition: Tuomo Suntola’s atomic layer epitaxy.Chem. Vap. Depos.2014, 20,
332–344. [CrossRef]
3. George, S.M. Atomic layer deposition: An overview. Chem. Rev.2010, 110, 111–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Leskelä, M.; Ritala, M. Atomic Layer Deposition Chemistry: Recent Developments and Future Challenges. Angew. Chemie - Int.
Ed. 2003, 42, 5548–5554. [CrossRef]
5. Oviroh, P .O.; Akbarzadeh, R.; Pan, D.; Coetzee, R.A.M.; Jen, T.-C. New development of atomic layer deposition: Processes,
methods and applications. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater.2019, 20, 465–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Shahmohammadi, M.; Pensa, E.; Bhatia, H.; Yang, B.; Jursich, G.; Takoudis, C.G. Enhancing the surface properties and func-
tionalization of polymethyl methacrylate with atomic layer-deposited titanium(IV) oxide. J. Mater. Sci.2020, 55, 17151–17169.
[CrossRef]
7. Knoops, H.C.M.; Potts, S.E.; Bol, A.A.; Kessels, W.M.M. Atomic Layer Deposition. In Handbook of Crystal Growth: Thin Films and
Epitaxy; Kuech, T., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2015; Volume 3, pp. 1101–1134. ISBN 9780444633057.
8. Hagen, D.J.; Pemble, M.E.; Karppinen, M. Atomic layer deposition of metals: Precursors and ﬁlm growth. Appl. Phys. Rev.2019,
6, 41309. [CrossRef]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 19 of 25
9. Johnson, R.W.; Hultqvist, A.; Bent, S.F. A brief review of atomic layer deposition: From fundamentals to applications. Mater.
Today 2014, 17, 236–246. [CrossRef]
10. Shahmohammadi, M.; Yang, B.; Takoudis, C.G. Applications of Titania Atomic Layer Deposition in the Biomedical Field and
Recent Updates. Am. J. Biomed. Sci. Res.2020, 8, 465–468. [CrossRef]
11. Tao, Q.; Jursich, G.; Takoudis, C. Selective atomic layer deposition of HfO2 on copper patterned silicon substrates. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2010, 96, 192105. [CrossRef]
12. Sheng, J.; Han, K.-L.; Hong, T.; Choi, W.-H.; Park, J.-S. Review of recent progresses on ﬂexible oxide semiconductor thin ﬁlm
transistors based on atomic layer deposition processes. J. Semicond.2018, 39, 11008. [CrossRef]
13. Majumder, P .; Jursich, G.; Takoudis, C. Structural phase transformation of Y2O3 doped HfO2 ﬁlms grown on Si using atomic layer
deposition. J. Appl. Phys.2009, 105, 104106. [CrossRef]
14. Meng, X.; Yang, X.; Sun, X. Emerging applications of atomic layer deposition for lithium-ion battery studies. Adv. Mater.2012, 24,
3589–3615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Jung, Y.S.; Cavanagh, A.S.; Dillon, A.C.; Groner, M.D.; George, S.M.; Lee, S.-H. Enhanced stability of LiCoO 2 cathodes in
lithium-ion batteries using surface modiﬁcation by atomic layer deposition. J. Electrochem. Soc.2009, 157, A75. [CrossRef]
16. Cao, Y.-Q.; Wang, S.-S.; Liu, C.; Wu, D.; Li, A.-D. Atomic layer deposition of ZnO/TiO2 nanolaminates as ultra-long life anode
material for lithium-ion batteries. Sci. Rep.2019, 9, 1–9. [CrossRef]
17. Lin, Y.-C.; Chung, V .P .J.; Santhanam, S.; Mukherjee, T.; Fedder, G.K. Sidewall Metallization on CMOS MEMS by Platinum ALD
Patterning. J. Microelectromechanical Syst.2020, 29, 978–983. [CrossRef]
18. Fraga, M.; Pessoa, R. Progresses in Synthesis and Application of SiC Films: From CVD to ALD and from MEMS to NEMS.
Micromachines 2020, 11, 799. [CrossRef]
19. Vulpe, S.; Nastase, F.; Dragoman, M.; Dinescu, A.; Romanitan, C.; Iftimie, S.; Moldovan, A.; Apostol, N. Physical properties of the
ferroelectric capacitors based on Al-doped HfO2 grown via Atomic Layer Deposition on Si. Appl. Surf. Sci.2019, 483, 324–333.
[CrossRef]
20. Fang, C.; Wang, M.; Han, P .; Cao, Y.-Q.; Wu, D.; Li, A.-D. High-Performance MIM Capacitors Using Zr-Sn-Ti-O Dielectrics Derived
from Atomic Layer Deposition. IEEE Electron. Device Lett.2019, 40, 682–685. [CrossRef]
21. Shim, J.H.; Chao, C.-C.; Huang, H.; Prinz, F.B. Atomic layer deposition of yttria-stabilized zirconia for solid oxide fuel cells. Chem.
Mater. 2007, 19, 3850–3854. [CrossRef]
22. Liu, C.; Wang, C.; Kei, C.; Hsueh, Y.; Perng, T. Atomic layer deposition of platinum nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes for
application in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells. Small 2009, 5, 1535–1538. [CrossRef]
23. Li, Y.K.; Choi, H.J.; Kim, H.K.; Chean, N.K.; Kim, M.; Koo, J.; Jeong, H.J.; Jang, D.Y.; Shim, J.H. Nanoporous silver cathodes
surface-treated by atomic layer deposition of Y: ZrO2 for high-performance low-temperature solid oxide fuel cells. J. Power Sources
2015, 295, 175–181. [CrossRef]
24. Wang, C.; Zhao, D.; Grice, C.R.; Liao, W.; Yu, Y.; Cimaroli, A.; Shrestha, N.; Roland, P .J.; Chen, J.; Yu, Z. Low-temperature
plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of tin oxide electron selective layers for highly efﬁcient planar perovskite solar cells. J.
Mater. Chem. A2016, 4, 12080–12087. [CrossRef]
25. Standridge, S.D.; Schatz, G.C.; Hupp, J.T. Toward plasmonic solar cells: Protection of silver nanoparticles via atomic layer
deposition of TiO2. Langmuir 2009, 25, 2596–2600. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Dong, X.; Fang, X.; Lv, M.; Lin, B.; Zhang, S.; Ding, J.; Yuan, N. Improvement of the humidity stability of organic–inorganic
perovskite solar cells using ultrathin Al2O3 layers prepared by atomic layer deposition. J. Mater. Chem. A2015, 3, 5360–5367.
[CrossRef]
27. Sheng, J.; Park, E.J.; Shong, B.; Park, J.-S. Atomic layer deposition of an indium gallium oxide thin ﬁlm for thin-ﬁlm transistor
applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2017, 9, 23934–23940. [CrossRef]
28. Lim, S.J.; Kwon, S.; Kim, H.; Park, J.-S. High performance thin ﬁlm transistor with low temperature atomic layer deposition
nitrogen-doped ZnO. Appl. Phys. Lett.2007, 91, 183517. [CrossRef]
29. Kwon, S.; Bang, S.; Lee, S.; Jeon, S.; Jeong, W.; Kim, H.; Gong, S.C.; Chang, H.J.; Park, H.; Jeon, H. Characteristics of the ZnO thin
ﬁlm transistor by atomic layer deposition at various temperatures. Semicond. Sci. Technol.2009, 24, 35015. [CrossRef]
30. Choi, J.H.; Jung, C.H.; Hwang, I.T.; Choi, J.H. Preparation and characterization of crosslinked poly(butylene adipate-co-
terephthalate)/polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane nanocomposite by electron beam irradiation. Radiat. Phys. Chem.2013, 82,
100–105. [CrossRef]
31. Narayan, R.J.; Adiga, S.P .; Pellin, M.J.; Curtiss, L.A.; Stafslien, S.; Chisholm, B.; Monteiro-Riviere, N.A.; Brigmon, R.L.; Elam, J.W.
Atomic layer deposition of nanoporous biomaterials. Mater. Today2010, 13, 60–64. [CrossRef]
32. Skoog, S.A.; Elam, J.W.; Narayan, R.J. Atomic layer deposition: Medical and biological applications. Int. Mater. Rev.2013, 58,
113–129. [CrossRef]
33. Narayan, R.J.; Monteiro-Riviere, N.A.; Brigmon, R.L.; Pellin, M.J.; Elam, J.W. Atomic layer deposition of TiO 2 thin ﬁlms on
nanoporous alumina templates: Medical applications. JOM 2009, 61, 12–16. [CrossRef]
34. Bishal, A.K.; Sukotjo, C.; Jokisaari, J.R.; Klie, R.F.; Takoudis, C.G. Enhanced Bioactivity of Collagen Fiber Functionalized with
Room Temperature Atomic Layer Deposited Titania. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2018, 10, 34443–34454. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 20 of 25
35. Xie, X.; Rieth, L.; Caldwell, R.; Diwekar, M.; Tathireddy, P .; Sharma, R.; Solzbacher, F. Long-Term Bilayer Encapsulation
Performance of Atomic Layer Deposited Al2O3 and Parylene C for Biomedical Implantable Devices. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
2013, 60, 2943–2951.
36. Nazarov, D.V .; Smirnov, V .M.; Zemtsova, E.G.; Yudintceva, N.M.; Shevtsov, M.A.; Valiev, R.Z. Enhanced osseointegrative
properties of ultra-ﬁne-grained titanium implants modiﬁed by chemical etching and atomic layer deposition. ACS Biomater. Sci.
Eng. 2018, 4, 3268–3281. [CrossRef]
37. Liu, L.; Bhatia, R.; Webster, T.J. Atomic layer deposition of nano-TiO2 thin ﬁlms with enhanced biocompatibility and antimicrobial
activity for orthopedic implants. Int. J. Nanomedicine2017, 12, 8711–8723. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Devlin-Mullin, A.; Todd, N.M.; Golrokhi, Z.; Geng, H.; Konerding, M.A.; Ternan, N.G.; Hunt, J.A.; Potter, R.J.; Sutcliffe, C.; Jones,
E. Atomic layer deposition of a silver nanolayer on advanced titanium orthopedic implants inhibits bacterial colonization and
supports vascularized de novo bone ingrowth. Adv. Healthc. Mater.2017, 6, 1700033. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Chang, S.; Selvaraj, S.K.; Choi, Y.-Y.; Hong, S.; Nakhmanson, S.M.; Takoudis, C. Atomic layer deposition of environmentally
benign SnTiOx as a potential ferroelectric material. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.2016, 34, 01A119. [CrossRef]
40. Koveshnikov, S.; Goel, N.; Majhi, P .; Wen, H.; Santos, M.B.; Oktyabrsky, S.; Tokranov, V .; Kambhampati, R.; Moore, R.; Zhu, F. In
0.53 Ga 0.47 As based metal oxide semiconductor capacitors with atomic layer deposition ZrO2 gate oxide demonstrating low
gate leakage current and equivalent oxide thickness less than 1 nm. ApPhL 2008, 92, 222904.
41. Darwish, G.; Huang, S.; Knoernschild, K.; Sukotjo, C.; Campbell, S.; Bishal, A.K.; Wu, C.D.; Takoudis, C.G.; Adelino, V .; Yang,
B. Improving Polymethyl Methacrylate Resin Using a Novel Titanium Dioxide Coating. J. Prosthodont. 2019, 28, 1011–1017.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Mallick, B.C.; Hsieh, C.-T.; Yin, K.-M.; Gandomi, Y.A.; Huang, K.-T. Review—On Atomic Layer Deposition: Current Progress and
Future Challenges. ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol.2019, 8, N55–N78. [CrossRef]
43. Bishal, A.K.; Butt, A.; Selvaraj, S.K.; Joshi, B.; Patel, S.B.; Yang, B.; Shukohfar, T.; Sukotjo, C.; Takoudis, C.G. Atomic Layer
Deposition in Bio-Nanotechnology: A Brief Overview. Crit. Rev. Biomed. Eng.2015, 43, 255–276. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. He, W. ALD: Atomic Layer Deposition-Precise and Conformal Coating for Better Performance; Springer: London, UK, 2015.
45. Hämäläinen, J.; Ritala, M.; Leskelä, M. Atomic layer deposition of noble metals and their oxides. Chem. Mater.2014, 26, 786–801.
[CrossRef]
46. Ritala, M. Atomic layer deposition. In High-K Gate Dielectrics; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2003; pp. 17–64.
ISBN 9781420034141.
47. Muñoz-Rojas, D.; Nguyen, V .H.; de la Huerta, C.M.; Aghazadehchors, S.; Jiménez, C.; Bellet, D. Spatial Atomic Layer Deposition
(SALD), an emerging tool for energy materials. Application to new-generation photovoltaic devices and transparent conductive
materials. Comptes Rendus Phys.2017, 18, 391–400. [CrossRef]
48. Dey, G.; Elliott, S.D. Copper(I) carbene hydride complexes acting both as reducing agent and precursor for Cu ALD: A study
through density functional theory. Theor. Chem. Acc.2014, 133, 1–7. [CrossRef]
49. Leskelä, M.; Ritala, M. Atomic layer deposition (ALD): From precursors to thin ﬁlm structures. Thin Solid Films2002, 409, 138–146.
[CrossRef]
50. Huang, S. Improving Polymethyl Methacrylate Resin Using Novel Nano-Ceramic Coating. Master dissertation, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, 2017.
51. Majumder, P .; Katamreddy, R.; Takoudis, C. Effect of ﬁlm thickness on the breakdown temperature of atomic layer deposited
ultrathin HfO2 and Al2O3 diffusion barriers in copper metallization. J. Cryst. Growth2007, 309, 12–17. [CrossRef]
52. Xu, R.; Tao, Q.; Yang, Y.; Takoudis, C.G. Atomic layer deposition and characterization of stoichiometric erbium oxide thin
dielectrics on Si (100) using (CpMe)3Er precursor and ozone. Appl. Surf. Sci.2012, 258, 8514–8520. [CrossRef]
53. Leskelä, M.; Ritala, M. ALD precursor chemistry: Evolution and future challenges. Le J. Phys. IV1999, 9, Pr8–Pr837. [CrossRef]
54. Parker, W.D.; Rondinelli, J.M.; Nakhmanson, S.M. First-principles study of misﬁt strain-stabilized ferroelectric SnTiO3. Phys. Rev.
B 2011, 84, 245126. [CrossRef]
55. Agarwal, R.; Sharma, Y.; Chang, S.; Pitike, K.C.; Sohn, C.; Nakhmanson, S.M.; Takoudis, C.G.; Lee, H.N.; Tonelli, R.; Gardner, J.
Room-temperature relaxor ferroelectricity and photovoltaic effects in tin titanate directly deposited on a silicon substrate. Phys.
Rev. B2018, 97, 54109. [CrossRef]
56. Puurunen, R.L. Random Deposition as a Growth Mode in Atomic Layer Deposition. Chem. Vap. Depos. 2004, 10, 159–170.
[CrossRef]
57. Fornari, C.I.; Fornari, G.; Paulo, H.d.O.; Abramof, E.; dos Travelho, J.S. Monte Carlo Simulation of Epitaxial Growth. In Epitaxy;
Zhong, M., Ed.; BoD–Books on Demand: Norderstedt, Germany, 2018; p. 113.
58. Venables, J. Surface processes in epitaxial growth. In Introduction to Surface and Thin Film Processes; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2000; pp. 144–151. ISBN 0521785006.
59. Itagaki, N.; Nakamura, Y.; Narishige, R.; Takeda, K.; Kamataki, K.; Koga, K.; Hori, M.; Shiratani, M. Growth of single crystalline
ﬁlms on lattice-mismatched substrates through 3D to 2D mode transition. Sci. Rep.2020, 10, 4669. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Carlsson, J.O.; Martin, P .M. Chemical Vapor Deposition; Third Edit.; Elsevier Ltd.: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2010;
ISBN 9780815520313.
61. Barna, P .B.; Radnóczi, G. 3—Structure formation during deposition of polycrystalline metallic thin ﬁlms. In Coffey Optical and
Magnetic Applications; Barmak, K., Ed.; Woodhead Publishing: Sawston, UK, 2014; pp. 67–120. ISBN 978-0-85709-057-7.

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 21 of 25
62. Vandalon, V .; Kessels, W.M.M. Revisiting the growth mechanism of atomic layer deposition of Al2O3: A vibrational sum-frequency
generation study. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.2017, 35, 05C313. [CrossRef]
63. Cremers, V .; Puurunen, R.L.; Dendooven, J. Conformality in atomic layer deposition: Current status overview of analysis and
modelling. Appl. Phys. Rev.2019, 6, 21302. [CrossRef]
64. Dezelah, C.L. Atomic Layer Deposition BT-Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology. In Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology; Bhushan, B., Ed.;
Springer Netherlands: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2012; pp. 161–171. ISBN 978-90-481-9751-4.
65. Bishal, A.K.; Sukotjo, C.; Takoudis, C.G. Room temperature TiO2 atomic layer deposition on collagen membrane from a titanium
alkylamide precursor. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum Surfaces Film.2017, 35, 01B134. [CrossRef]
66. Puurunen, R.L. Growth per cycle in atomic layer deposition: A theoretical model. Chem. Vap. Depos.2003, 9, 249–257. [CrossRef]
67. Kim, J.; Kim, T.W. Initial surface reactions of atomic layer deposition. Jom 2009, 61, 17–22. [CrossRef]
68. Leem, J.; Park, I.; Li, Y.; Zhou, W.; Jin, Z.; Shin, S.; Min, Y.S. Role of HCl in atomic layer deposition of TiO2 thin ﬁlms from titanium
tetrachloride and water. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc.2014, 35, 1195–1201. [CrossRef]
69. Matero, R.; Rahtu, A.; Ritala, M. In situ quadrupole mass spectrometry and quartz crystal microbalance studies on the atomic
layer deposition of titanium dioxide from titanium tetrachloride and water. Chem. Mater.2001, 13, 4506–4511. [CrossRef]
70. Ren, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, D.W. Density functional theory study of initial stage of HfO2 atomic layer deposition on hydroxylated
SiO2 surface. J. Mol. Struct. Theochem2007, 803, 23–28. [CrossRef]
71. Lownsbury, J.M.; Gladden, J.A.; Campbell, C.T.; Kim, I.S.; Martinson, A.B.F. Direct Measurements of Half-Cycle Reaction Heats
during Atomic Layer Deposition by Calorimetry. Chem. Mater.2017, 29, 8566–8577. [CrossRef]
72. Richey, N.E.; De Paula, C.; Bent, S.F. Understanding chemical and physical mechanisms in atomic layer deposition. J. Chem. Phys.
2020, 152, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Puurunen, R.L. Correlation between the growth-per-cycle and the surface hydroxyl group concentration in the atomic layer
deposition of aluminum oxide from trimethylaluminum and water. Appl. Surf. Sci.2005, 245, 6–10. [CrossRef]
74. Mui, C.; Musgrave, C.B. Atomic layer deposition of HfO2 using alkoxides as precursors. J. Phys. Chem. B2004, 108, 15150–15164.
[CrossRef]
75. Hu, X.; Schuster, J.; Schulz, S.E.; Gessner, T. Surface chemistry of copper metal and copper oxide atomic layer deposition from
copper(ii) acetylacetonate: A combined ﬁrst-principles and reactive molecular dynamics study. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.2015, 17,
26892–26902. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Yang, J.; Cao, K.; Hu, Q.; Wen, Y.; Liu, X.; Chen, R.; Shan, B. Unravelling the selective growth mechanism of AlO X with
dimethylaluminum isopropoxide as a precursor in atomic layer deposition: A combined theoretical and experimental study. J.
Mater. Chem. A2020, 8, 4308–4317. [CrossRef]
77. Hu, Z.; Turner, C.H. Initial surface reactions of TiO 2 atomic layer deposition onto SiO 2 surfaces: Density functional theory
calculations. J. Phys. Chem. B2006, 110, 8337–8347. [CrossRef]
78. Elliott, S.D. Predictive process design: A theoretical model of atomic layer deposition. Comput. Mater. Sci. 2005, 33, 20–25.
[CrossRef]
79. Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S.D. Multiple proton diffusion and ﬁlm densiﬁcation in atomic layer deposition modeled by density functional
theory. Chem. Mater.2013, 25, 878–889. [CrossRef]
80. Cui, C.; Ren, J. A density functional theory study on the reactions of chlorine loss in ZrO2 thin ﬁlms by atomic-layer deposition.
Comput. Theor. Chem.2012, 979, 38–43. [CrossRef]
81. Athavale, S.D.; Economou, D.J. Molecular dynamics simulation of atomic layer etching of silicon. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum,
Surfaces, Film.1995, 13, 966–971. [CrossRef]
82. Bahramian, A. Study on growth rate of TiO 2 nanostructured thin ﬁlms: Simulation by molecular dynamics approach and
modeling by artiﬁcial neural network. Surf. Interface Anal.2013, 45, 1727–1736. [CrossRef]
83. Brown, K.S.; Saggese, C.; Le Monnier, B.P .; Héroguel, F.; Luterbacher, J.S. Simulation of Gas- and Liquid-Phase Layer-By-Layer
Deposition of Metal Oxides by Coarse-Grained Modeling. J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 6713–6720. [CrossRef]
84. He, X.; Luo, L. Theory of the lattice Boltzmann method: From the Boltzmann equation to the lattice Boltzmann equation. Phys.
Rev. E1997, 56, 6811–6817. [CrossRef]
85. Chen, S.; Doolen, G.D. Lattice Boltzmann method for ﬂuid ﬂows. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech.1998, 30, 329–364. [CrossRef]
86. Pan, D.; Li, T.; Chien Jen, T.; Yuan, C. Numerical modeling of carrier gas ﬂow in atomic layer deposition vacuum reactor: A
comparative study of lattice Boltzmann models. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.2014, 32, 01A110. [CrossRef]
87. Ernst, M.; Dietzel, M.; Sommerfeld, M. A lattice Boltzmann method for simulating transport and agglomeration of resolved
particles. Acta Mech.2013, 224, 2425–2449. [CrossRef]
88. Harrison, R.L. Introduction to Monte Carlo simulation. AIP Conf. Proc.2009, 1204, 17–21. [CrossRef]
89. Mordechai, S. Applications of Monte Carlo Method in Science and Engineering; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2011; ISBN 9533076917.
90. Brandimarte, P .Handbook in Monte Carlo simulation: Applications in Financial Engineering, Risk Management, and Economics; John
Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014; ISBN 1118593642.
91. Kwak, Y.H.; Ingall, L. Exploring Monte Carlo simulation applications for project management. Risk Manag. 2007, 9, 44–57.
[CrossRef]
92. Bird, G.A. Monte-Carlo simulation in an engineering context. Prog. Astronaut. Aeronaut.1981, 74, 239–255.

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 22 of 25
93. Schwille, M.C.; Schössler, T.; Barth, J.; Knaut, M.; Schön, F.; Höchst, A.; Oettel, M.; Bartha, J.W. Experimental and simulation
approach for process optimization of atomic layer deposited thin ﬁlms in high aspect ratio 3D structures. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A
Vac. Surf. Film.2017, 35, 01B118. [CrossRef]
94. Jin, L.; Li, Y.; Hu, Z.; Chu, J. Full three-dimensional morphology evolution of amorphous thin ﬁlms for atomic layer deposition.
AIP Adv.2018, 8, 045304. [CrossRef]
95. Deminsky, M.; Knizhnik, A.; Belov, I.; Umanskii, S.; Rykova, E.; Bagatur, A.; Potapkin, B.; Stoker, M.; Korkin, A.; Bagatur’yants,
A.; et al. Mechanism and kinetics of thin zirconium and hafnium oxide ﬁlm growth in an ALD reactor. Surf. Sci.2004, 549, 67–86.
[CrossRef]
96. Adomaitis, R.A. Development of a multiscale model for an atomic layer deposition process. J. Cryst. Growth2010, 312, 1449–1452.
[CrossRef]
97. Weckman, T.; Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S.D.; Laasonen, K. Kinetic Monte Carlo Study of the Atomic Layer Deposition of Zinc Oxide. J.
Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044–27058. [CrossRef]
98. Berti, C.; Ulbig, P .; Burdorf, A.; Seippel, J.; Schulz, S. Correlation and prediction of liquid-phase adsorption on zeolites using
group contributions based on adsorbate-solid solution theory. Langmuir 1999, 15, 6035–6042. [CrossRef]
99. Khalifa, M.; Lue, L. A group contribution method for predicting the solubility of mercury.Fluid Phase Equilib.2017, 432, 76–84.
[CrossRef]
100. Shahmohammadi, M.; Mukherjee, R.; Takoudis, C.G.; Diwekar, U.M. Optimal design of novel precursor materials for the atomic
layer deposition using computer-aided molecular design. Chem. Eng. Sci.2021, 234, 116416. [CrossRef]
101. Shahmohammadi, M.; Mukherjee, R.; Takoudis, C.G.; Diwekar, U.M. Quantiﬁcation of Water Impurity in an Atomic Layer
Deposition Reactor Using Group Contribution Method. Res. Dev. Mater. Sci.2021, 15, 1703–1706. [CrossRef]
102. Kim, K.-J.; Diwekar, U.M. Efﬁcient combinatorial optimization under uncertainty. 2. Application to stochastic solvent selection.
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.2002, 41, 1285–1296. [CrossRef]
103. Cheng, H.-C.; Wang, F.-S. Optimal biocompatible solvent design for a two-stage extractive fermentation process with cell recycling.
Comput. Chem. Eng.2008, 32, 1385–1396. [CrossRef]
104. Gebreslassie, B.H.; Diwekar, U.M. Efﬁcient ant colony optimization for computer aided molecular design: Case study solvent
selection problem. Comput. Chem. Eng.2015, 78, 1–9. [CrossRef]
105. Giovanoglou, A.; Barlatier, J.; Adjiman, C.S.; Pistikopoulos, E.N.; Cordiner, J.L. Optimal solvent design for batch separation based
on economic performance. AIChE J.2003, 49, 3095–3109. [CrossRef]
106. Kim, K.-J.; Diwekar, U.M.; TOMAZI, K.G. Entrainer selection and solvent recycling in complex batch distillation. Chem. Eng.
Commun. 2004, 191, 1606–1633. [CrossRef]
107. Marcoulaki, E.C.; Kokossis, A.C. On the development of novel chemicals using a systematic optimisation approach. Part II.
Solvent design. Chem. Eng. Sci.2000, 55, 2547–2561. [CrossRef]
108. Samudra, A.P .; Sahinidis, N.V . Optimization-based framework for computer-aided molecular design.AIChE J.2013, 59, 3686–3701.
[CrossRef]
109. Hostrup, M.; Harper, P .M.; Gani, R. Design of environmentally benign processes: Integration of solvent design and separation
process synthesis. Comput. Chem. Eng.1999, 23, 1395–1414. [CrossRef]
110. Mukherjee, R.; Gebreslassie, B.; Diwekar, U.M. Design of novel polymeric adsorbents for metal ion removal from water using
computer-aided molecular design. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy2017, 19, 483–499. [CrossRef]
111. Trevizo, C.; Daniel, D.; Nirmalakhandan, N. Screening alternative degreasing solvents using multivariate analysis. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2000, 34, 2587–2595. [CrossRef]
112. Chemmangattuvalappil, N.G.; Eljack, F.T.; Solvason, C.C.; Eden, M.R. A novel algorithm for molecular synthesis using enhanced
property operators. Comput. Chem. Eng.2009, 33, 636–643. [CrossRef]
113. Sinha, M.; Achenie, L.E.K. Systematic design of blanket wash solvents with recovery considerations. Adv. Environ. Res.2001, 5,
239–249. [CrossRef]
114. Eden, M.R.; Jørgensen, S.B.; Gani, R.; El-Halwagi, M.M. A novel framework for simultaneous separation process and product
design. Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif.2004, 43, 595–608. [CrossRef]
115. Eljack, F.T.; Eden, M.R. A systematic visual approach to molecular design via property clusters and group contribution methods.
Comput. Chem. Eng.2008, 32, 3002–3010. [CrossRef]
116. Odele, O.; Macchietto, S. Computer aided molecular design: A novel method for optimal solvent selection. Fluid Phase Equilib.
1993, 82, 47–54. [CrossRef]
117. Pistikopoulos, E.N.; Stefanis, S.K. Optimal solvent design for environmental impact minimization. Comput. Chem. Eng.1998, 22,
717–733. [CrossRef]
118. Salazar, J.; Diwekar, U.M.; Joback, K.; Berger, A.H.; Bhown, A.S. Solvent selection for post-combustion CO 2 capture. Energy
Procedia 2013, 37, 257–264. [CrossRef]
119. Churi, N.; Achenie, L.E.K. Novel mathematical programming model for computer aided molecular design. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.
1996, 35, 3788–3794. [CrossRef]
120. Duvedi, A.P .; Achenie, L.E.K. Designing environmentally safe refrigerants using mathematical programming.Chem. Eng. Sci.
1996, 51, 3727–3739. [CrossRef]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 23 of 25
121. Xu, W.; Diwekar, U.M. Environmentally friendly heterogeneous azeotropic distillation system design: Integration of EBS selection
and IPS recycling. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.2005, 44, 4061–4067. [CrossRef]
122. Xu, W.; Diwekar, U.M. Multi-objective integrated solvent selection and solvent recycling under uncertainty using a new genetic
algorithm. Int. J. Environ. Pollut.2007, 29, 70–89. [CrossRef]
123. Folic, M.; Adjiman, C.S.; Pistikopoulos, E.N. Computer-aided solvent design for reactions: Maximizing product formation. Ind.
Eng. Chem. Res.2008, 47, 5190–5202. [CrossRef]
124. Lin, B.; Chavali, S.; Camarda, K.; Miller, D.C. Computer-aided molecular design using Tabu search. Comput. Chem. Eng.2005, 29,
337–347. [CrossRef]
125. Camarda, K.V .; Sunderesan, P . An Optimization Approach to the Design of Value-Added Soybean Oil Products.Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 2005, 44, 4361–4367. [CrossRef]
126. Karunanithi, A.T.; Achenie, L.E.K.; Gani, R. A computer-aided molecular design framework for crystallization solvent design.
Chem. Eng. Sci.2006, 61, 1247–1260. [CrossRef]
127. Yamamoto, H.; Tochigi, K. Computer-aided molecular design to select foaming agents using a neural network method. Ind. Eng.
Chem. Res.2008, 47, 5152–5156. [CrossRef]
128. Benavides, P .T.; Gebreslassie, B.H.; Diwekar, U.M. Optimal design of adsorbents for NORM removal from produced water in
natural gas fracking. Part 2: CAMD for adsorption of radium and barium. Chem. Eng. Sci.2015, 137, 977–985. [CrossRef]
129. Doshi, R.K.; Mukherjee, R.; Diwekar, U.M. Application of Adsorbate Solid Solution Theory To Design Novel Adsorbents for
Arsenic Removal Using CAMD. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.2018, 6, 2603–2611. [CrossRef]
130. Qi, F.X.Y.; Liu, K.; Ma, D.K.; Cai, F.F.; Liu, M.; Xu, Q.L.; Chen, W.; Qi, C.Z.; Yang, D.P .; Huang, S.M. Dual active sites fabricated
through atomic layer deposition of TiO2 on MoS2 nanosheet arrays for highly efﬁcient electroreduction of CO2 to ethanol. J.
Mater. Chem. A2021, 9, 6790–6796. [CrossRef]
131. Cho, Y.; Kim, S.H.; Kim, B.S.; Kim, Y.; Jeon, W. Modulation of the adsorption chemistry of a precursor in atomic layer deposition
to enhance the growth per cycle of a TiO2 thin ﬁlm. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.2021, 23, 2568–2574. [CrossRef]
132. Park, B.E.; Oh, I.K.; Lee, C.W.; Lee, G.; Shin, Y.H.; Lansalot-Matras, C.; Noh, W.; Kim, H.; Lee, H.B.R. Effects of Cl-Based Ligand
Structures on Atomic Layer Deposited HfO2. J. Phys. Chem. C2016, 120, 5958–5967. [CrossRef]
133. Sasinska, A.; Bialuschewski, D.; Islam, M.M.; Singh, T.; Deo, M.; Mathur, S. Experimental and Theoretical Insights into Inﬂuence
of Hydrogen and Nitrogen Plasma on the Water Splitting Performance of ALD Grown TiO2 Thin Films. J. Phys. Chem. C2017,
121, 15538–15548. [CrossRef]
134. Iatsunskyi, I.; Vasylenko, A.; Viter, R.; Kempinski, M.; Nowaczyk, G.; Jurga, S.; Bechelany, M. Tailoring of the electronic properties
of ZnO-polyacrylonitrile nanoﬁbers: Experiment and theory. Appl. Surf. Sci.2017, 411, 494–501. [CrossRef]
135. Sarkar, S.; Patel, R.L.; Liang, X.H.; Park, J. Unveiling the Role of CeO2 Atomic Layer Deposition Coatings on LiMn2O4 Cathode
Materials: An Experimental and Theoretical Study. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2017, 9, 30599–30607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Kim, D.K.; Chae, J.; Hong, S.B.; Park, H.; Jeong, K.S.; Park, H.W.; Kwon, S.R.; Chung, K.B.; Cho, M.H. Interface engineering for a
stable chemical structure of oxidized-black phosphorus via self-reduction in AlOx atomic layer deposition. Nanoscale 2018, 10,
22896–22907. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Lawniczak-Jablonska, K.; Wolska, A.; Kuzmiuk, P .; Rejmak, P .; Kosiel, K. Local atomic order of the amorphous TaOx thin ﬁlms in
relation to their chemical resistivity. RSC Adv.2019, 9, 35727–35734. [CrossRef]
138. Lee, S.; Baek, G.; Lee, J.H.; Van, T.T.N.; Ansari, A.; Shong, B.; Park, J.S. Molecular layer deposition of indicone and organic-
inorganic hybrid thin ﬁlms as ﬂexible transparent conductor. Appl. Surf. Sci.2020, 525, 146383. [CrossRef]
139. Song, Z.X.; Zhu, Y.N.; Liu, H.S.; Banis, M.N.; Zhang, L.; Li, J.J.; Doyle-Davis, K.; Li, R.Y.; Sham, T.K.; Yang, L.J.; et al. Engineering
the Low Coordinated Pt Single Atom to Achieve the Superior Electrocatalytic Performance toward Oxygen Reduction. SMALL
2020, 16, 2003096. [CrossRef]
140. Choi, S.; Ansari, A.; Yun, H.J.; Kim, H.; Shong, B.; Choi, B.J. Growth of Al-rich AlGaN thin ﬁlms by purely thermal atomic layer
deposition. J. Alloys Compd.2021, 854, 157186. [CrossRef]
141. He, Y.F.; Pham, H.; Gao, Y.; Patel, R.L.; Sarkar, S.; Liang, X.H.; Park, J. Discovery of an Unexpected Metal Dissolution of
Thin-Coated Cathode Particles and Its Theoretical Explanation. Adv. Theory Simulations2020, 3, 2000002. [CrossRef]
142. Zou, F.; Liu, Y.; Mou, C.; Zhu, S. Optimization of Refractive Index Sensitivity in Nanoﬁlm-Coated Long-Period Fiber Gratings
near the Dispersion Turning Point. J. Light. Technol.2020, 38, 889–897. [CrossRef]
143. Bermudez, V .M. Theoretical study of the adsorption of Lewis acids on MoS2 in relation to atomic layer deposition of Al2O3. J. Vac.
Sci. Technol. A2020, 38, 062412. [CrossRef]
144. Petersen, M. Theoretical study of reaction mechanisms of ZrCl4 with hydrated and hydroxlated Si(100) surfaces. Comput. Mater.
Sci. 2004, 30, 77–80. [CrossRef]
145. Jung, J.-S.S.; Lee, S.-K.K.; Hong, C.-S.S.; Shin, J.-H.H.; Kim, J.-M.M.; Kang, J.-G.G. Atomic layer deposition of ZrO2 thin ﬁlm on Si
(100) using {η5: η1-Cp (CH2) 3NMe} Zr (NMe2) 2/O3 as precursors. Thin Solid Films2015, 589, 831–837. [CrossRef]
146. Gharachorlou, A.; Detwiler, M.D.; Gu, X.K.; Mayr, L.; Klötzer, B.; Greeley, J.; Reifenberger, R.G.; Delgass, W.N.; Ribeiro, F.H.;
Zemlyanov, D.Y. Trimethylaluminum and Oxygen Atomic Layer Deposition on Hydroxyl-Free Cu(111). ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2015, 7, 16428–16439. [CrossRef]
147. Seo, S.; Yeo, B.C.; Han, S.S.; Yoon, C.M.; Yang, J.Y.; Yoon, J.; Yoo, C.; Kim, H.J.; Lee, Y.B.; Lee, S.J.; et al. Reaction Mechanism of
Area-Selective Atomic Layer Deposition for Al2O3 Nanopatterns. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2017, 9, 41607–41617. [CrossRef]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 24 of 25
148. Karasulu, B.; Vervuurt, R.H.J.; Kessels, W.M.M.; Bol, A.A. Continuous and ultrathin platinum ﬁlms on graphene using atomic
layer deposition: A combined computational and experimental study. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 19829–19845. [CrossRef]
149. Pan, D.; Ma, L.; Xie, Y.; Jen, T.C.; Yuan, C. On the physical and chemical details of alumina atomic layer deposition: A combined
experimental and numerical approach. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.2015, 33, 021511. [CrossRef]
150. Halder, A.; Lenardi, C.; Timoshenko, J.; Mravak, A.; Yang, B.; Kolipaka, L.K.; Piazzoni, C.; Seifert, S.; Bonacic-Koutecky, V .;
Frenkel, A.I.; et al. CO 2 Methanation on Cu-Cluster Decorated Zirconia Supports with Different Morphology: A Combined
Experimental In Situ GIXANES/GISAXS, Ex Situ XPS and Theoretical DFT Study. ACS Catal.2021, 11, 6210–6224. [CrossRef]
151. Perevalov, T.V .; Prosvirin, I.P .; Suprun, E.A.; Mehmood, F.; Mikolajick, T.; Schroeder, U.; Gritsenko, V .A. The atomic and electronic
structure of Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 and Hf0.5Zr0.5O2:La ﬁlms. J. Sci. Mater. DEVICES2021, 6, 595–600. [CrossRef]
152. Yu, N.K.; Moon, C.H.; Park, J.; Lee, H.B.R.; Shong, B. Evaluation of silicon tetrahalide precursors for low-temperature thermal
atomic layer deposition of silicon nitride. Appl. Surf. Sci.2021, 565, 150603. [CrossRef]
153. Beer, S.M.J.; Boysen, N.; Muriqi, A.; Zanders, D.; Berning, T.; Rogalla, D.; Bock, C.; Nolan, M.; Devi, A. A study on the inﬂuence of
ligand variation on formamidinate complexes of yttrium: New precursors for atomic layer deposition of yttrium oxide. Dalt.
Trans. 2021, 50, 12944–12956. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
154. Borbon-Nunez, H.A.; Muniz, J.; El Hachimi, A.G.; Frausto-Silva, D.; Gutierrez-Diaz, J.L.; Dominguez, D.; Tiznado, H.; Cuentas-
Gallegos, A.K. Effect of oxygen based functional groups on the nucleation of TiO2 by atomic layer deposition: A theoretical and
experimental study. Mater. Chem. Phys.2021, 267, 124588. [CrossRef]
155. Boukhari, A.; Deghfel, B.; Mahroug, A.; Amari, R.; Selmi, N.; Kheawhom, S.; Mohamad, A.A. Thickness effect on the properties of
Mn-doped ZnO thin ﬁlms synthesis by sol-gel and comparison to ﬁrst-principles calculations. Ceram. Int.2021, 47, 17276–17285.
[CrossRef]
156. Zhu, X.P .; Guo, J.J.; Li, X.X.; Zhou, R.D.; Wang, D.; Zhao, W. Evolvement Investigation of Secondary Electron Emission for
Ultrathin MgO Coatings Prepared by Atomic Layer Deposition. Appl. Sci.2021, 11, 4801. [CrossRef]
157. Weckman, T.; Laasonen, K. First principles study of the atomic layer deposition of alumina by TMA-H2O-process. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys.2015, 17, 17322–17334. [CrossRef]
158. Travis, C.D.; Adomaitis, R.A. Modeling alumina atomic layer deposition reaction kinetics during the trimethylaluminum exposure.
Theor. Chem. Acc.2014, 133, 3–11. [CrossRef]
159. Xu, K.; Ye, P .D. Theoretical study of atomic layer deposition reaction mechanism and kinetics for aluminum oxide formation at
graphene nanoribbon open edges. J. Phys. Chem. C2010, 114, 10505–10511. [CrossRef]
160. Kayanuma, M.; Choe, Y.-K.; Hagiwara, T.; Kameda, N.; Shimoi, Y. Theoretical Study of the Mechanism for the Reaction of
Trimethylaluminum with Ozone. ACS Omega2021, 6, 26282–26292. [CrossRef]
161. Puurunen, R.L. Growth per cycle in atomic layer deposition: Real application examples of a theoretical model. Chem. Vap. Depos.
2003, 9, 327–332. [CrossRef]
162. Burgess, D.R.; Maslar, J.E.; Hurst, W.S.; Moore, E.F.; Kimes, W.A.; Fink, R.R.; Nguyen, N. V Atomic Layer Deposition—Process
Models and Metrologies. AIP Conf. Proc.2005, 788, 141–146. [CrossRef]
163. Seo, S.; Nam, T.; Lee, H.B.R.; Kim, H.; Shong, B. Molecular oxidation of surface –CH3 during atomic layer deposition of Al2O3
with H2O, H2O2, and O3: A theoretical study. Appl. Surf. Sci.2018, 457, 376–380. [CrossRef]
164. Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C.B. Quantum chemical study of the mechanism of aluminum oxide atomic layer deposition. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2002, 80, 3304–3306. [CrossRef]
165. Elliott, S.D. Models for ALD and MOCVD growth of rare earth oxides. Top. Appl. Phys.2006, 106, 73–86. [CrossRef]
166. Park, S.; Park, B.E.; Yoon, H.; Lee, S.; Nam, T.; Cheon, T.; Kim, S.H.; Cheon, H.; Im, S.; Seong, T.; et al. Comparative study on
atomic layer deposition of HfO2: Via substitution of ligand structure with cyclopentadiene. J. Mater. Chem. C2020, 8, 1344–1352.
[CrossRef]
167. Mukhopadhyay, A.B.; Musgrave, C.B.; Sanz, J.F. Atomic layer deposition of hafnium oxide from hafnium chloride and water.J.
Am. Chem. Soc.2008, 130, 11996–12006. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Mastail, C.; Lanthony, C.; Olivier, S.; Ducéré, J.-M.; Landa, G.; Estève, A.; Rouhani, M.D.; Richard, N.; Dkhissi, A. Introducing
densiﬁcation mechanisms into the modelling of HfO2 atomic layer deposition. Thin Solid Films2012, 520, 4559–4563. [CrossRef]
169. Hu, Z.; Turner, C.H. Atomic layer deposition of TiO2 from TiI4 and H2O onto SiO2 surfaces: Ab initio calculations of the initial
reaction mechanisms. J. Am. Chem. Soc.2007, 129, 3863–3878. [CrossRef]
170. Zhou, G.; Ren, J.; Zhang, S. Initial growth mechanisms of ZrO2 and TiO2 thin ﬁlms using cycloheptatrienyl-cyclopentadienyl
heteroleptic precursors: A comparative study by density functional theory. Appl. Surf. Sci.2013, 283, 968–974. [CrossRef]
171. Han, J.H.; Gao, G.; Widjaja, Y.; Garfunkel, E.; Musgrave, C.B. A quantum chemical study of ZrO2 atomic layer deposition growth
reactions on the SiO2 surface. Surf. Sci.2004, 550, 199–212. [CrossRef]
172. Ren, J.; Cui, C.; Zhou, G.; Liu, Y.; Hu, Y.; Wang, B. A theoretical study on initial growth mechanism of ZrO 2 ﬁlm using
cyclopentadienyl-type precursor. Thin Solid Films2011, 519, 3716–3721. [CrossRef]
173. Zhou, G.; Ren, J.; Zhang, S. Theoretical study on the initial reaction mechanisms of ansa-metallocene zirconium precursor on
hydroxylated Si(100) surface. J. Mol. Model.2016, 22, 117. [CrossRef]
174. Elliott, S.D.; Dey, G.; Maimaiti, Y. Classiﬁcation of processes for the atomic layer deposition of metals based on mechanistic
information from density functional theory calculations. J. Chem. Phys.2017, 146, 052822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Nanomaterials 2022, 12, 831 25 of 25
175. Doan, H.A.; Li, Z.; Farha, O.K.; Hupp, J.T.; Snurr, R.Q. Theoretical insights into direct methane to methanol conversion over
supported dicopper oxo nanoclusters. Catal. Today2018, 312, 2–9. [CrossRef]
176. Dey, G.; Elliott, S.D. Mechanism for the atomic layer deposition of copper using diethylzinc as the reducing agent: A density
functional theory study using gas-phase molecules as a model. J. Phys. Chem. A2012, 116, 8893–8901. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
177. Phung, Q.M.; Pourtois, G.; Swerts, J.; Pierloot, K.; Delabie, A. Atomic layer deposition of ruthenium on ruthenium surfaces: A
theoretical study. J. Phys. Chem. C2015, 119, 6592–6603. [CrossRef]
178. Filatova, E.A.; Hausmann, D.; Elliott, S.D. Investigating routes toward atomic layer deposition of silicon carbide: Ab initio
screening of potential silicon and carbon precursors. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.2017, 35, 01B103. [CrossRef]
179. Cremers, V .; Geenen, F.; Detavernier, C.; Dendooven, J. Monte Carlo simulations of atomic layer deposition on 3D large surface
area structures: Required precursor exposure for pillar- versus hole-type structures. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film.
2017, 35, 01B115. [CrossRef]
180. Murray, C.; Elliott, S.D. Density functional theory predictions of the composition of atomic layer deposition-grown ternary oxides.
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces2013, 5, 3704–3715. [CrossRef]
181. Hu, Z.; Shi, J.; Heath Turner, C. Molecular dynamics simulation of the Al2O3 ﬁlm structure during atomic layer deposition. Mol.
Simul. 2009, 35, 270–279. [CrossRef]