Multiple Proton Diﬀusion and Film Densiﬁcation in Atomic Layer
Deposition Modeled by Density Functional Theory
Mahdi Shirazi* and Simon D. Elliott
Tyndall National Institute, University College Cork, Lee Maltings, Cork, Ireland
ABSTRACT: To investigate the atomic layer deposition (ALD)
reactions for growth of HfO2 from Hf(NMe2)4 (TDMAHf) and
H2O, a density functional theory (DFT) slab model was employed.
We inspected all energy steps, from the early stage of adsorption of
each ALD precursor to the densiﬁcation of multiple atoms into
bulk-like HfO2 layers. The activation energy calculations show that
repeated proton diﬀusion from the surface to amide ligands and
rotation of the protonated amine is more energetically accessible
than the simple elimination of the amine in the initial stage. We
therefore propose that multiple protons diﬀuse to the amide ligands of the Hf precursor before desorption of protonated ligands
takes place. Loss of a proton from surface oxygen frees it up for bonding to Hf of the precursor. Protonation of ligands, and
especially desorption of ligands, frees up Hf for bonding to surface oxygen. These eﬀects are termed“densiﬁcation”, as they bring
Hf−O packing closer to the bulk scenario. Densiﬁcation is associated with substantial release of energy. During the metal pulse,
saturation of the surface by remaining fragments HfX causes adsorption of further metal precursor to stop. The presence of these
fragments prevents further chemisorption of HfX4, since this requires the creation of a strong dative bond between Hf and O.
Next, during the H2O pulse, Hf exchanges its remaining ligands with OH groups. The exchange occurs due to the decomposition
of adsorbed H2O molecules in clusters of HfX. Decomposition of H2O when adsorbed onto a (Hf(NMe2))x (x ≥ 2) cluster (e.g.,
dimers) also increases the coordination of Hf and O. Simultaneously, low-coordinated oxygen atoms appear at the surface, which
are reactive sites for the next metal pulse. With saturation of the surface by OH groups, H2O molecules begin to appear. This
detailed description of ALD chemistry allows us to make qualitative predictions about how the process depends on temperature.
The data can also be inputted into kinetic simulations for a quantitative view of the complexﬁlm growth process.
KEYWORDS: density functional theory (DFT), atomic layer deposition (ALD), kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC), metal oxide,
metal alkylamide precursor, multiple proton diﬀusion, densiﬁcation, activation energy, dissociation, adsorption
■ INTRODUCTION
Hafnium oxide (HfO2) shows a band gap of approximately 6
eV and a high dielectric constant in thinﬁlm form of 25 which
makes it an important high- k material. In the ongoing
miniaturization of electronic devices, nanometer-thin ﬁlms of
hafnium oxide are replacing silicon oxide as the gate insulator in
ﬁeld eﬀect transistors.1 The hafnium oxide thin ﬁlms are
fabricated using atomic layer deposition (ALD).2 This study
unveils the atomic scale reactions of ALD for hafnium oxide
thin ﬁlms.
In ALD, gaseous precursors are allowed individually into the
reactor chamber in alternating pulses. The precursors are highly
reactive to each other, and so between each pulse inert gas is
admitted to prevent gas phase reactions. Each precursor thus
chemisorbs onto the substrate, rather than reacting in the gas-
phase. In the ideal ALD situation, substrate −precursor
reactions are self-controlled. This means that, when the
substrate is covered with fragments of precursor at the end of
each pulse, other precursors in the gas phase are not able to
react with the surface any more. Growth is therefore stopped
until the other precursor is admitted in the next pulse and
reacts with the remaining fragments. The sequences of pulses
and purges is followed until the desired thickness of thinﬁlm is
obtained.
In ALD of hafnium oxide, HfCl4 and water are the most
frequently used precursor combination. 3 However, a major
diﬃculty with the HfCl4 precursor is chlorine contamination in
the thin ﬁlms. The contamination decreases with increasing
substrate temperature. However, higher temperature means a
drop in coverage of reactive OH fragments as H2O dissociates
and consequently a drop in growth rate per cycle. Therefore an
alternative precursor chemistry is required that exhibits suitable
thermal stability, conformal ALD growth, and low levels of
impurities at low temperature. Hafnium alkylamide precursors,
like Hf(NEtMe)4, Hf(NEt2)4, and Hf(NMe2)4 (Et = C2H5,M e
=C H3), are interesting alternatives together with water leading
to smooth and conformal thinﬁlms.4 These precursors operate
at relatively low temperature ( ∼300 °C). While there is
discussion about the stability of alkylamide precursors as a
function of temperature, this is out of the scope of this paper,
where we consider only“ideal” ALD reactions. For such ideal
Received: November 9, 2012
Revised: February 18, 2013
Published: February 28, 2013
Article
pubs.acs.org/cm
© 2013 American Chemical Society 878 dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889
Downloaded via LEIBNIZ UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER on December 6, 2024 at 13:00:50 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


reactions, we expect that the three commonly used amides
listed above will behave similarly and so carry out calculations
on just one of them, Hf(NMe2)4.
The growth of hafnium oxide from HfCl4 and water on
diﬀerent substrates was studied theoretically before. 5,6 The
eﬀect of under-coordinated surface oxygen and hydroxyl groups
(as the active sites) on the hafnium of adsorbing precursor was
inspected, and it was shown that the dissociation of HCl is
facilitated via increasing the c.n. of hafnium during the water
pulse.7 The ALD reactions for elimination of HCl from HfCl4
are computed to be endothermic5,7 which is in sharp contrast to
the success of this precursor in ALD experiments. In the cluster
model the neglect of under-coordinated atoms6 might cause
this discrepancy, while in the slab model the neglected change
in entropy7 might be the cause. Therefore, in the current study
of metal alkylamide precursors, we consider both the change in
entropy and the inﬂuence of under-coordinated atoms andﬁnd
exothermic reactions, which resolves the discrepancy between
experiment and theory. Here we should emphasize that some
aspect of the reaction pathways for amides is diﬀerent from
those of halides. The amide is more bulky and more reactive
toward a hydroxylated surface than the chloride. The amide
ligands are more Brønsted basic than chloride ligands. The
ﬁlms deposited by metal alkylamide precursors show a high
degree of conformality and low level of impurities.4,8 The focus
of this article is on explaining how the metal alkylamide
precursors are eﬀective in ALD at low temperature.
Calculations using a periodic slab are carried out on a HfO2
surface subjected to Hf(NMe2)4 and H2O pulses. In this model,
the Lewis acid−base reactions of precursor adsorption and
byproduct elimination are described. The eﬀect of bridging O,
bare O, and OH as adsorption sites are considered. Under-
coordinated oxygen is expected to have an important role
during densiﬁcation of precursor fragments. Densiﬁcation is
deﬁned as the increase in density due to improved Hf −O
packing, associated with an increase in coordination numbers of
Hf and O from their molecular values (4 and 2, respectively)
toward bulk solid values (7 and 4).9 Moreover, H-transfer from
sites adjacent to the adsorbed precursor is considered so as to
see how those transfers change the reaction path in ALD.
It is clear that OH groups play an important role in growth
reactions in oxide ALD, whether the coreagent is H2Oo rO 3
(protons are produced during oxidation of organic fragments in
the latter case 10). Di ﬀerent types of proton di ﬀusion are
inspected, to investigate whether multiple proton diﬀusion can
facilitate dissociation of the fragment. We found that the way
protons are diﬀusing between the surface and the adsorbed
complex, as well as within the complex, reveals why low
temperature ALD works in this case.
The intention of our work is to elucidate the mechanism of
hafnium oxide ALD, by obtaining quantitative information on
the energetics ΔE, ΔG, and Ea of reactions between adsorbate
structures during both the Hf(NMe2)4 pulse and the water
pulse. We use density functional theory (DFT) to compute the
reaction energetics of Hf(NMe 2)4 adsorption, amide group
dissociation, and proton di ﬀusion on a fully hydroxylated
hafnium oxide surface. We also compute the reactions during
the H2O pulse, such as the interaction of H2O with fragments
of Hf(NMe2)4 precursor, explaining how the water molecule
obtains higher coordination and becomes densi ﬁed at the
surface. The model thus describes chemical reactions
throughout the ALD process, from the early stage of the
Hf(NMe2)4 precursor with the substrate to obtaining bulk-like
hafnium oxide at the end of the water pulse.
■ COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS
To model the growth reactions of HfO2 from HfX4 (X = N(CH3)2)
and H2O, self-consistent DFT was employed.11 The reaction energies,
activation energies, and ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) of the
system were calculated in a 3D periodic model utilizing VASP.12 In
these calculations, the electronic energies were approximated using the
projected augmented wave (PAW)13 description of atomic cores and
the functional of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE).14 The plane
wave cutoﬀ energy was 400 eV.15 For Hf atoms 5d26s2, N atoms
2s22p3, O atoms 2s22p4, and C atoms 2s22p2 electrons were included as
valence electrons. All calculations were closed shell since no unpaired
electrons are expected in these calculations. The self-consistent steps
were converged to an energy diﬀerence of 10−4 eV.
Geometries were optimized using the conjugate−gradient scheme16
with no symmetry restraints and noﬁxed atoms to a convergence of
gradients to less than 10 −3 eV/Å. To compute ab initio
thermodynamics, the translational entropy (S) of gas-phase molecules
only were calculated 17 under the assumption that rotational,
vibrational, and surface contributions toS are approximately constant.
TStransl at T = 500 K were calculated to be 1.50, 1.21, and 0.49 eV for
HfX4, HX, and H2O, respectively. This allows Gibbs free energiesΔG
of the reactions to be reported step by step.
Hafnium oxide has a di ﬀerent crystal structure at di ﬀerent
temperatures.18 The monoclinic phase is the most stable phase at
low temperature, and our calculation showed that the (111) surface
plane has the lowest energy. Therefore this direction has been
regarded as a stable substrate for studying reactions during HfO 2
growth on HfO2. The surface structure during actual ALD reactions is
not known but is certainly more complex. ALD produces amorphous
or polycrystalline ﬁlms of HfO2, depending on precursor chemistry
and growth temperature,19 but the limitations of our periodic model
do not permit us to simulate this. Converged values of surface energies
of the (111) surfaces showed that four layers of HfO2 is enough to be
considered as the slab.20 To avoid slab−slab interaction in the periodic
model, 10 Å was regarded as the vacuum distance. The k-point
sampling in reciprocal space was generated by the Monkhorst-Pack
method:21 4 × 4 × 4 and 4× 4 × 1 grid sizes were utilized for bulk and
slab optimization, respectively. For the hydroxylated surface, we used a
four-layered 2× 2 supercell, and sok-point sampling was reduced to 2
× 2 × 1.
Ab initio MD calculations were carried out within the micro-
canonical ensemble.22 The Verlet algorithm was used to integrate
Newton’s classical equations of motion for the ions. A time step of 1 fs
was found to be adequate for all frequencies of oscillation in the
system. The calculations were done for 400 ionic steps. The initial
temperature for assigning random velocities was varied from 300 to
600 K, in line with ALD experiments.
In our modeling, we are confronted with the obstacle of rare
events.23 For long periods of time (relative to our MD simulation) the
system is trapped in one minimum and cannot escape from that
minimum. To observe the transition to a new minimum, very long MD
simulations would be needed, which would be inaccessible with
current computational power. We therefore tried out other plausible
conﬁgurations (candidate minimums) by hand and checked stability
with optimization or ab initio MD. Occasionally, chemical reactions
occurred rapidly from the chosen conﬁgurations and were observed
during optimization or MD. In those cases, we then looked for
pathways showing how the system reached those conﬁgurations.
To calculate activation energies between two minima, we used the
nudged elastic band (NEB) approach24,25 with climbing option. The
conjugate gradient algorithm was found to be much faster than quasi-
Newton methods to minimize forces in the NEB method and
therefore conjugate gradient was employed for calculations. To
compute the activation energy of HX desorption from surface-Hf
with NEB, only the Hf−N bond length was stretched and all other
degrees of freedom were optimized. Up to 10 images were considered
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889879


in those reaction paths. The maximum change in ionic coordinates
between images was 0.30 Å. In proton diﬀusion, several reaction paths
between each pair of minima were searched to ﬁnd the minimum
energy path. In the case of proton diﬀusion from oxygen to nitrogen,
only the coordinates of the proton wereﬁxed as it moved from one
minimum to the other one. The maximum change in coordinates
between images was 0.10 Å. For HX rotation, all atoms in the HX
group were rotated around the Hf−N bond typically by 20° in every
image.
Generally in ALD, we are looking for low reaction barriers,
accessible at process temperatures of around 500 K. In many cases, the
barriers obtained were larger than 1 eV, and those are not reported
here. For instance, for ligand rotation, the barrier is sensitive to
whether the precursor is attached to O or OH. If attached to O, the
precursor cannot move up from the surface and a higher barrier is
obtained (1.78 eV), which is too high to be relevant for ALD.
Furthermore, if the rotational barrier in one direction is larger than in
the other direction, then we quote the lower value ofEa.
■ RESULTS
End of H2O Pulse. Bare HfO2 has many Lewis acid (Hf)
and base (O) sites at the surface because of under-coordination.
By contrast, at the end of the H2O pulse in ALD, the surface is
saturated with OH groups. In our model, we therefore added
extra H2O molecules to the bare (111) surface until we had
obtained a hydroxylated surface. Those H 2O molecules are
added to both the top and the bottom of the slab to minimize
the slab dipole. The H2O molecules initially are dissociated to
H+ and OH−. Under-coordinated surface oxygen splits a proton
from the water molecule, and surface hafnium also gets a higher
coordination number (c.n.) due to bonding to the OH group.
The bond length between the Hf (c.n. = 7) and the terminal
OH group at the surface (c.n. = 2) is 2.06 Å, which is lower
than the bond length between the Hf (c.n. = 7) and O (c.n. =
3), 2.17 Å. When hafnium and oxygen atoms achieve a
suﬃciently high c.n., they do not dissociate water molecules at
the surface any more. In other words, when the surface is
saturated by hydroxyl groups, there are no Lewis acid and base
sites to dissociate water molecules. At this stage, water
molecules can persist at the surface. The bond length between
Hf of the surface and an adsorbed H2O molecule is 2.42 Å.
Those molecules are not tightly bonded to the surface, and
during ab initio MD simulation at 500 K they were seen to
separate from the surface. The NEB calculation shows 0.46 eV
barrier for dissociation of H2O from the seven-coordinated
hafnium at the surface. The resulting model of the surface had a
coverage of 5 OH/nm2 and 2 H2O/nm2.
Adsorption During the Hf Pulse. Although unreactive
toward H 2O, the OH-terminated surface has Lewis basic
oxygen sites, that is, those that can make a chemical bond by
electron donation to the metal of the precursor. Those active
sites can be sorted into terminal hydroxyl groups, terminal
oxygen, and bridging oxygen (Figure 1). Terminal hydroxyl
groups and terminal oxygen are one-coordinated, and bridging
oxygen is two-coordinated (excluding H). Our calculations
show that the HfX4 precursor cannot anchor to the bridging
oxygen. Likewise, other oxygen atoms with even higher c.n. are
therefore inaccessible to the metal of the precursor. Weﬁnd
that the terminal oxygen and hydroxyl oxygen are able to make
a dative chemical bond with Hf of the precursor.
ΔE were calculated for the mentioned sites (Table 1,
reactions 3−5). If the change in entropy in the adsorption
reaction is considered, which is essentially from translational
entropy, then the chemisorption is energetically unfavorable.
ΔG are respectively 1.37, 1.49, and 1.65 eV for reactions 3−5
(Table 1). The NEB calculation showed that the desorption
barrier for (HfX4(s) → HfX4(g)) is 1.00 eV, and during ab
initio MD also no evidence of desorption was observed.
Therefore the hafnium precursor is anchored to the surface in a
metastable state at either site for periods of time that are long
enough for further reactions to take place.
Proton Diﬀusion (During Either Precursor Pulse).On
the growing surface during ALD, protons may be bound to O
or to N (of the ligand), and hence there are many proton
diﬀusion paths, which can be sorted as diﬀusion from oxygen to
oxygen, oxygen to nitrogen, and nitrogen to nitrogen. All
proton diﬀusion types are shown in Table 1. In the calculations
of proton diﬀusion, changes in entropy are small and can be
ignored, so only changes in energy are reported. Di ﬀerent
diﬀusion pathways have diﬀerent activation energies.
We considerﬁrst proton diﬀusion from oxygen to oxygen in
diﬀerent situations (Table 1, reactions 1 and 2). Generally, we
ﬁnd that protons stay on under-coordinated oxygen. If we
remove a proton from one-coordinated hydroxyl, the oxygen
spontaneously dissociates a proton from a nearby H 2O
molecule or from another hydroxyl with higher c.n. (reaction
1). These proton transfers are barrierless and take place during
optimization. So we conclude that protons move quickly to the
oxygen with lowest c.n. However, there is a 0.75 eV barrier for
proton diﬀusion from one- or two-coordinated oxygen to a
similar oxygen with the same c.n. (reaction 2).
We investigated whether protons diﬀuse from the surface to
subsurface layers. A proton could not be optimized on the four-
coordinated oxygen of the subsurface, and it transferred
spontaneously to the three-coordinated oxygen. In another
case, the existence of a proton on a four-coordinated oxygen
caused the bond between hafnium and that oxygen to break,
with an overall cost for proton transfer of ΔE = +1.03 eV.
Therefore, during the processes of ALD, protons stay on top of
the HfO2 surface and do not diﬀuse into subsurface layers of
highly coordinated O.
Another type of proton di ﬀusion is from oxygen to the
ligand. For a bulky ligand like amide, there are various
geometries for the protonated ligand HX. The NEB
calculations showed that the rate of proton diﬀusion strongly
depends on the distance that proton hops from O to N. For
Figure 1. Optimized geometry for adsorption of HfX4 molecule onto
OH terminated HfO2. Terminal hydroxyl group (a), terminal oxygen
(b), and bridging oxygen (c) are highlighted. The HfX4 is anchored to
a terminal oxygen (red = O, blue = N, white = H, large gray = Hf,
small gray = C).
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889880


example, we obtained a 1.35 eV barrier for diﬀusion of the
proton across the distance 2.43 Å, while we obtained various
values from 0.05 to 0.39 eV for the much shorter diﬀusion
distance ∼ 0.7 ± 0.05 Å (Table 1, reactions 6 −8) (The
corresponding O−N distances are similar, i.e., 2.8 −3.0 Å).
During ab initio MD or NEB calculations, these protons move
up or down between the surface and the ligand. The bond
length between Hf of the precursor and surface OH (c.n. = 3) is
changed from 2.26 to 2.18 and 2.07 Å due to theﬁrst and
second proton di ﬀusion from the surface di ﬀusion to the
nitrogen (Table 1, reactions 6, 7).
Protons can also diﬀuse through the adsorbate via rotation of
the protonated ligand HX (Figure 2). The proton on nitrogen
can be oriented down toward the surface or up away from the
surface. Those locations are indicated by “dn” and “up”,
respectively, in Figure 2. Several reaction paths were regarded
to ﬁnd how the proton moves. The ligand needs space to
rotate, and this is facilitated by lengthening of the Hf···O bond
between the entire precursor and the surface. Such lengthening
apparently costs more energy for surf−O−Hf (Ea ∼ 1.78 eV for
rotation of HX) than for surf−OH−Hf (Ea ∼ 0.51 eV) (Figure
2 and Table 1, reaction 9). In other words, a higher barrier
exists toward amide rotation when the precursor is attached to
terminal oxygen, and this is probably because terminal oxygen
does not allow the precursor to move away from the surface as
easily as OH does. The adsorption mode thus aﬀects the rate of
proton diﬀusion and hence of ligand elimination and ALD
growth. The bond length between the Hf of the precursor and
the surface OH (c.n. = 3) is slightly decreased from 2.18 to 2.15
Å because of the rotation of the protonated ligand in
Hf(HdnX)X3 ⇌ Hf(HupX)X3.
Proton di ﬀusion from nitrogen to nitrogen within the
adsorbate after proton rotation is the other di ﬀusion type
(Figure 3). Ea = 0.59 eV was calculated by NEB for this
diﬀusion (Table 1, reaction 10).
Table 1. Diﬀusion Barriers for Protons in ALD and HfX4 Adsorption Energiesa
label reaction Ea (eV) ΔE (eV) explanation
1O c.n.=1(s) + OHc.n.>1(s) ⇌ OHc.n.=1(s) + Oc.n.>1(s) 0.00 0.00
2O c.n.=m(s) + OHc.n.=m(s) ⇌ OHc.n.=m(s) + Oc.n.=m(s) 0.75 0.00 m =1 ,2
3 HfX 4(g) ⇌ HfX4(s) 1.00 −0.13 surf −O
4 HfX 4(g) ⇌ HfX4(s) 1.00 −0.01 surf −OH
5 HfX 4(g) ⇌ HfX4(s) 1.00 0.15 surf −H2O
6 HfX 4(s) + OH(s)⇌ Hf(HdnX)X3(s) + O(s) 0.05 −0.57 surf −OH
7 Hf(H dnX)X3(s) + OH(s)⇌ Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)X2 0.20 −0.19 surf −OH
8 Hf(H dnX)(HdnX)X2(s) + OH(s)⇌ Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X(s) + O(s) 0.30 −0.08 surf −OH
9 Hf(H dnX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X(s) 0.51 −0.13 surf −OH
10 Hf(H upX)(X′)X2(s) ⇌ HfX(HupX′)X2(s)b 0.59 −0.47 surf −OH
11 Hf(H upX)(HdnX)X2(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HupX)X2(s) 0.49 −0.32 surf −OH
12 Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HdnX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HupX)X(s)c 0.42 −2.30 surf −OH
13 Hf(H dnX)(HdnX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HdnX)X(s) 0.38 0.00 surf −OH
14 HfX 2(s) + OH(s)⇌ Hf(HupX)X(s) + O(s) 0.91 −0.34
15 Hf(H upX)X(s) + OH(s)⇌ Hf(HupX)(HupX)(s) + O(s) 0.88 −0.27
aEa is activation energy and X = N(CH3)2. The “dn” and “up” indicate the position of proton on the nitrogen. surf−* means Hf precursor is
anchored to * on the surface.bX′ shows the topmost nitrogen.cDensiﬁed precursor; this precursor is not stable at the surface.
Figure 2.Rotation of protonated ligand from Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X to Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)(HupX)X, X = N(CH3)2, where the“dn” (a) and“up”
(c) show the orientation of the proton on nitrogen relative to the surface. The saddle point is indicated in (b).
Figure 3. Highlighted proton diﬀuses from nitrogen to the topmost nitrogen. The saddle point is indicated in the middle snapshot (b).
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889881


Elimination of Ligands and Densiﬁcation. The common
assumption about the ALD mechanism is that proton transfer
to a ligand, X(s)→ HX(s), is followed rapidly by desorption of
the protonated ligand, HX(s)→ HX(g), before the next proton
transfer step to the remaining precursor fragment.17 Accord-
ingly, the activation energy for desorption of theﬁrst HX from
Hf(HdnX)X3 was calculated by NEB to beEa = 0.89 eV (Table
2, reaction 1).
Here, we test the alternative mechanism, where multiple
proton transfer gives Hf(HX)(HX)X 2(s) or Hf(HX)(HX)-
(HX)X(s), etc., followed later by desorption of HX(g) (Table
1, reactions 11−13). As shown in Figure 4, the Hf−N distance
increases from 2.2 to 2.6 Å as a result of protonation of the
amide, showing that there is still substantial bonding between
the neutral protonated amine (dn) and the Hf center. Reaction
2 in Table 2 is dissociation of HupX from Hf(HupX)(HdnX)-
(HdnX)X. The activation energyEa = 0.89 eV for this reaction is
the same as that computed for reaction 1 in Table 2. To achieve
this, a proton initially diﬀuses from the surface to nitrogen, then
rotates to the “up” position, and di ﬀuses to the highest
nitrogen, before ﬁnally desorbing as HX. Those diﬀusion steps
are explained above.
These data show that rotation of the protonated ligand
(Table 1, reactions 9, 11, and 12) has a much higher rate than
dissociation of HupX from the precursor (Table 2, reactions 1
and 2). For instance, using the computedEa in the Arrhenius
equation for 500 K shows that the rate of Table 1 reaction 9 is 4
orders of magnitude higher than Table 2 reaction 2.
In terms of activation energy the most likely desorption is
reaction 3 in Table 2, in which three protons have diﬀused to
the precursor and two amides have rotated upward. These
protons are highlighted in Figure 5. The activation energy was
calculated by NEB to be 0.39 eV. The rate of this reaction is
therefore 6 orders of magnitude higher at 500 K than
dissociation of HdnX in Table 2 reactions 1 and 2. In other
words, when the precursor has the Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X
conﬁguration, the next proton rotation dn → up makes the
desorption of H upX easier. We have observed that HX
dissociates from Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HdnX)X during ab initio
MD (Figure 5) atT = 500 K for 0.4 ps. Therefore HupX is not
tightly bonded to the metal when another HupX is present. The
bond length between Hf of the precursor and the surface O
(c.n. = 2) changes from 1.80 Å in Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X to
1.82 Å in Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX)X.
When the precursor chemisorbs to the surface, hafnium
makes a bond with oxygen at the surface and hafnium becomes
ﬁve-coordinated. The bonds between N and Hf may have some
covalent character. After the ﬁrst elimination, the hafnium is
Table 2. Activation Energy for HX Desorption from Protonated HfX4 and HfX3 Conﬁgurations; That Is, Probably the Hf Pulsea
label reaction Ea (eV) ΔE (eV) ΔG500K (eV)
1 Hf(H dnX)X3(s) ⇌ HfX3(s) + HX(g) 0.89 −0.35 −1.56
2 Hf(H upX)(HdnX)(HdnX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)X(s) + HX(g) 0.89 −0.94 −2.15
3 Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HdnX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HdnX)X(s) + HX(g) 0.39 −0.44 −1.65
4 Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HupX)X(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)X(s) + 2HX(g) 0.00 −1.91 −4.33
5 Hf(H dnX)X2(s) ⇌ HfX2(s) + HX(g) 1.69 −1.18 −2.39
6 Hf(H upX)(HupupX)(HdnX)(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(s) + HupX(g) 1.09 −2.92 −4.13
7 Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HdnX)(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(s) + HupX(g) 1.07 −2.92 −4.13
8 Hf(H upX)(HupX)(HdnX)(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(HupX)(s) + HdnX(g) 1.73 −2.92 −4.13
aΔG is free energy atT = 500 K, andEa is activation energy. X = N(CH3)2 and the “dn” and “up” show the position of proton on the nitrogen.
Figure 4. Hf(HupX)(HdnX)(HdnX)(HdnX) precursor at the surface.
Because of multiple proton diﬀusion, the topmost bond between Hf−
N is stretched. Red circles show the diﬀused protons from the surface
to the nitrogen.
Figure 5. Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX)X precursor at the hafnium oxide
surface. The topmost HX is dissociating from hafnium during ab initio
MD calculation. Red circles show the diﬀused protons from surface to
the ligands.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889882


four-coordinated. With further elimination of HX, hafnium
bonds with more oxygen at the surface, becomes more highly
coordinated, and thus densiﬁes toward the bulk c.n.
Rotation of the third proton from Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX)X
to Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HupX)X (Table 1, reaction 12) causes
spontaneous desorption of two HX at the same time (Table 2,
reaction 4). In a similar way, as shown in Figure 6, Hf moves
spontaneously downward into the surface during optimization
of Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HupX)(HupX) and the Hf(HupX)(HupX)
fragment densiﬁes to the surface (i.e., c.n. of Hf increases from
4 to 6). The HX desorption step is barrierless in these cases.
As indicated in Table 2, multiple proton diﬀusion to N and
rotation to H upX reduces the activation energy for HX
desorption. Upwardly oriented HX dissociates readily from
Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX) during ab initio MD. Therefore as
already observed above for HfX4 conﬁgurations, the diﬀusion of
multiple protons to the adsorbate increases the HX dissociation
rate, in the case of ligands like X = amide. The bond length
between the Hf of the precursor and the surface O (c.n. = 2)
changes from 1.91 Å for HfX 3 to 1.87 and 1.81 Å in
Hf(HdnX)X2 and Hf(HdnX)(HdnX)X, respectively. This bond
length is not changed in Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX).
A substantial energy diﬀerence ΔG = −4.1 eV atT = 500 K is
seen for dissociation of the second HX (Table 2 reaction 6).
This energy diﬀerence is higher than theﬁrst dissociation, and
this probably comes from densi ﬁcation, as shown in serial
snapshots in Figure 7. Loss of the second HX allows hafnium to
move down into the surface and bond with under-coordinated
oxygen. As the remaining amide groups are bulky in HfX 2
conﬁgurations, we found a small barrier toward this
densiﬁcation step, which is overcome during ab initio MD.
After densiﬁcation, the amide groups in HfX 2 are bent up
(Figure 7d), and so the next proton can be expected to travel a
larger distance than in HfX3 to bind to N and detach HX from
hafnium. Indeed, calculations show a larger barrier than before
for proton di ﬀusion from oxygen to nitrogen (Table 1,
reactions 14, 15).
When the precursor is densiﬁed to the surface, the Hf c.n.
increases from 3 to 5. This changes the rate of subsequent
dissociation of HX because we ﬁnd a strong dependence of
activation energies on c.n. of Hf for the crucial reaction steps of
HX rotation and desorption. The activation energyEa = 1.13
eV was calculated for HX dissociation from Hf(HdnX)X (Table
3, reaction 1). After densiﬁcation, hafnium has a higher c.n.,
which may explain why this dissociation has a lower barrier
than Hf(H dnX)X2 (Table 2, reaction 5). In the case of
Hf(HupX)X, Ea = 0.89 eV is calculated for HX desorption
(Table 3, reaction 2). Multiple di ﬀusion increases the
dissociation rate in these con ﬁgurations also (Figure 8):
Hf(HdnX)(HupX) has a lower barrierEa = 0.30 eV (Table 3,
reaction 3) than Hf(HdnX)X.
As indicated in Table 3 reaction 3, exothermicΔG = −0.40
eV was obtained for HX desorption from HfX2. However, for
dissociation of the last HX, the reaction is endothermic,ΔG =
0.53 eV, with a substantial activation barrier Ea = 1.64 eV
(Table 3, reaction 8). Hence the energetics favor Hf(HX) as
Figure 6. Snapshots from optimization of Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HupX)(HupX) conﬁguration. Hf moves down into the surface and becomes strongly
attached to a total of four O atoms in the surface as 2HX desorbs.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889883


the most likely fragment at the end of the HfX4 pulse, if there
are suﬃcient surface protons.
Another interesting reaction is transferring X from the
adsorbed fragment HfX2 to another under-coordinated Hf at
the surface. As shown in Figure 9, HfX2 releases a ligand, which
is transferred to the neighboring hafnium and changes it from
c.n. = 4 to c.n. = 5. This mechanism is observed during ab initio
MD, indicating a small barrier.
Start of H2O Pulse. As was mentioned above, the most
probable conﬁguration for the metal precursor is predicted to
be HfX or Hf(HX) at the end of the metal pulse. Therefore,
during the subsequent water pulse, adsorbing H2O interacts
mostly with HfX (c.n. = 4 or 5 for Hf). In our models, we
attached H2O to HfX via O···Hf bonding (Figure 10a), but
when we have low population of exposed Hf at the surface, the
attached H2O is not dissociated and desorbs spontaneously
from the system (Figure 10b). It seems that there are not
enough active sites on the surface to dissociate H2O into OH−
and H+. In the case of HfX2, the problem is worse because of
steric hindrance by X with H2OH2O. Moreover, other Hf in the
subsurface layers are six- or seven-coordinated and so cannot
eﬀect dissociation of OH from H2O.
However, a cluster of HfX leads to dissociation of adsorbed
H2O molecules. For instance, four HfX is considered as such a
cluster. In Figure 11a, four HfX are optimized on adjacent sites
(Hf···Hf = 3.3 −5.2 Å). We proceeded by adding H 2O
molecules one by one to Hf atoms within the 4HfX cluster
at the surface (Figure 11b). As indicated in Table 3, reaction 4,
Figure 7. By densiﬁcation, the c.n. of Hf in the precursor is increased as HfX2 becomes strongly attached to three oxygen atoms at the surface.
Snapshots are from ab initio MD atT = 500 K for 0.4 ps.
Table 3. Reaction Routes for HX Dissociation after Densiﬁcation and Ligand Exchange with Oxygena
label reaction Ea (eV) ΔE (eV) ΔG500K (eV)
1 Hf(H dnX)X(s) ⇌ HfX(s) + HX(g) 1.13 1.36 +0.15
2 Hf(H upX)X(s) ⇌ HfX(s) + HX(g) 0.89 1.03 −0.17
3 Hf(H dnX)(HupX)(s) ⇌ Hf(HupX)(s) + HX(g) 0.30 0.80 −0.40
4 4HfX(s) + H 2O(g) ⇌ 3HfX(HfHupX)(s)b + OH(s) 0.00 −2.24 −1.75
5 3HfX(HfH upX)(s) + H2O(g) + O(s)⇌ 3HfX(HfHupX)(s) + OH(s) + OH(s) −1.56 −1.07
6 3HfX(HfH upX)(s) + H2O(g) ⇌ 2HfX(HfHupX)(HfHupX)(s) + OH(s) −1.19 −0.70
7 2HfX(HfH upupX)(HfHupX)(s) + H2O(g) ⇌ HfX(HfHupX)(HfHupX)(HfHupX)(s) + OH(s) −1.25 −0.76
8 Hf(HX)(s)(c.n. = 5) ⇌ Hf(s)(c.n. = 4) + HX(g) 1.64 1.74 +0.53
9 Hf(HX)(s)(c.n. = 6) ⇌ Hf(s)(c.n. = 5) + HX(g) 0.83 0.80 −0.40
10 Hf(HX)(s)(c.n. = 7) ⇌ Hf(s)(c.n. = 6) + HX(g) 0.56 −0.14 −1.35
aΔG is free energy atT = 500 K andEa is activation energy.bIn the case of HfX there is no diﬀerence between “dn” and “up” proton.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889884


the ﬁrst H2O molecule is spontaneously dissociated to H+ and
OH− during optimization. The proton is bound to N (Lewis
base) as HX and the hydroxyl group is attached to Hf (Lewis
acid). For the second H2O, dissociation of the H2O molecule
does not take place instantly. So the H2O molecule was taken
apart to OH− and H+ by hand, and the new geometry was
optimized (Table 3 reaction 5). This time the proton forms a
bond to under-coordinated O at the surface. Indeed, occasion-
ally both protons of the H2O molecule were transferred to
surface O and left two-coordinate oxygen bridging between
under-coordinated hafnium. For the next two adsorbing H2O
molecules (Table 3 reactions 6 and 7), the proton was
optimized on nitrogen and the remaining hydroxyl group was
bridging between under-coordinated hafnium. As there are
many active sites (basic and acidic sites) in this surface model,
calculation of activation energies for these steps was diﬃcult to
manage.
As tabulated in Table 3 from reactions 4−7, ΔE and ΔG are
both negative for the dissociative chemisorption of H2O. From
reactions 4−6, whenever we add more H2O molecules to the
surface, ΔG and ΔE become less negative. This reduction
seems to accompany the loss of Lewis acid and base sites
through increased coordination to H2O.
For HX loss, the opposite eﬀect is seen in reactions 8−10
(Table 3) where ΔG becomes more negative as Hf c.n.
increases. In other words, repeated adsorption of H 2O
molecules increases the c.n. of Hf and is accompanied by the
simultaneous dissociation of more and more HX from the
surface. The activation energy is reduced from 1.64 to 0.56 eV
for the last HX dissociation from Hf(HX) (Table 3 reactions 8
and 10). In the case of Figure 11b, 3H2O were added and
optimized. The Ea for loss of HX is 0.83 eV when Hf is six-
coordinated. Another H2O molecule was added to the c.n. = 6
hafnium that is shown in Figure 11b producing Hf with c.n. = 7
with oxygen (Figure 12a).Ea = 0.56 eV is the activation energy
for the last HX dissociation (Table 3, reaction 10).
Figure 8.Optimized Hf(HdnX)(HupX) attached to three oxygen atoms
at the surface where the“dn” and “up” show the orientation of the
proton on nitrogen relative to the surface.
Figure 9. Amide group of the densiﬁed HfX2 was transferred to under-coordinated hafnium at the surface; snapshots are from ab initio MD
calculation, starting atT = 500 K and running for 0.4 ps.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889885


■ DISCUSSION
Ab initio calculations show that the Hf of the precursor adsorbs
by making a dative bond with the Lewis acid sites at the surface.
Formation of Hf −O bonds is energetically favorable. The
existence of low coordinated O or OH is necessary for the
dative bond to persist. The dative bond between the Hf of the
precursor and high coordinated O (c.n. = 2) is not strong
enough to preserve it for further reactions. The low and high
coordinated O sites are created by decomposition of H 2O
molecules during the H2O pulse. Their equilibrium population
essentially depends on the temperature of the substrate, which
rules the rate of adsorption andﬁnally the rate of growth in
ALD. We could notﬁnd any reaction path for other adsorption
modes of HfX4 or for direct reactions between X of gas-phase
HfX4 and surface protons. The existence of the Hf−O dative
bond is the necessary prerequisite for HX elimination.26
As the existence and mobility of Brønsted acidic protons is
crucial in the ALD of oxides, various proton diﬀusion pathways
are inspected (Table 1). Proton di ﬀusion from oxygen to
oxygen has various barriers, which change according to the c.n.
of oxygen. Generally protons remain on low-coordinated
oxygen and therefore remain primarily at the surface rather
than in the bulk. The existence of protons at the surface makes
them available as coreagents for the dissociation of ligand
fragments.
The proton diﬀusion from oxygen to ligand nitrogen is the
other type of proton diﬀusion. In our simulations, this proton
Figure 10. H2O molecule is not dissociated when there are not enough Lewis acid and base sites in terms of number; snapshots are from
optimization.
Figure 11.(a) Cluster of four HfX. (b) The upper-most oxygen originally adsorbed as H2O where red circles show typical OH and H from H2O
dissociation. (c) Dissociation of HX from six coordinated Hf during the water pulse.
Figure 12.Dissociation of HX from seven coordinated hafnium during water pulse. Four oxygen (originally desorbed as H2O) are coordinated to the
cluster, and dissociation of HX from the resulting seven-coordinate Hf is more favorable than the situation in Figure 11.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889886


hops frequently between oxygen and nitrogen and may be
thought of as a shared proton between the oxygen and
nitrogen. The desorption barriers of the fragment HdnX are
relatively large but are lowered by a factor of 2−3 by rotation of
the protonated ligand to HupX (Table 1, reactions 9, 11, and 12,
respectively), hence facilitating the desorption of the fragment
HupX. For all proton diﬀusion pathways, which are tabulated
from reaction 6 to reaction 13 in Table 1, the barriers are lower
than the desorption barrier for HdnX (Table 2, reactions 1 and
2), which makes proton di ﬀusion more probable than
desorption of HdnX at the initial stage of precursor adsorption.
In other words, multiple ligands become protonated before
desorption commences.
Proton diﬀusion from the O of surface to the N of HfX4
shows relatively low barriers and exothermic reactions energies
(Table 1, reactions 6 −8). However, these proton di ﬀusion
barriers in HfX2 are much higher than in HfX4, at least for
smooth surfaces (Table 1, reactions 14 and 15), because the
proton must then travel a larger distance from O to attach to
the N. However, if HfX2 is densiﬁed into the subsurface layers,
then Hf is surrounded by more oxygen than at the smooth
surface. In this case, the proton may travel a shorter distance to
attach to the nitrogen than on the smooth surface. The proton
diﬀusion barrier therefore is lower. An alternative route to
protonated HfX 2 is by repeated loss of HX from larger
protonated fragments such as Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX).
The resulting Hf(HupX)(HdnX) species can densify directly,
without the need for proton diﬀusion.
However, if Hf of the precursor is not coordinated to enough
oxygen from the surface, for instance, if it bonds to just two
oxygen atoms, in spite of multiple di ﬀusion, the HfX 2 or
Hf(HX)2 conﬁguration keeps both ligands. This illustrates the
link between ligand loss and coordination to the surface, as
already computed by Zydor et al. for Ti precursors.26
Diﬀusion of protons from the surface oxygen to the nitrogen
in ligands weakens the bonds between hafnium and ligands.
Then, as noted above, rotation of protonated ligand dn→ up
lowers the activation energy for HX desorption signiﬁcantly.
The more protonated ligands that rotate, the more rapidly the
dissociation of HX proceeds. In the extreme case, we observed
that two ligands spontaneously dissociated from Hf(H upX)-
(HupX)(HupX)X and Hf simultaneously densiﬁed to the surface.
In other words, the system prefers to pass several low barriers
instead of few high barriers in ALD. When the temperature is
increased, those pathways with high barriers become more
active. For instance, thermal ly activated decomposition
reactions that do not need coreagents such as H+ (i.e., standard
chemical vapor deposition) may become active at higher
temperatures. However, we have not computed such reactions
here.
Hf in HfX4 is bound to a single O and so isﬁve-coordinated.
By loss of a ligand, it becomes four-coordinated HfX3.W eﬁnd
that dissociation of another HX from HfX3 conﬁgurations is
harder than from HfX4 ones. (Table 2, reactions 1 and 5),
showing that second elimination is harder in ALD. The other
interesting point is the e ﬀect of ligand rotation on the
desorption of HX from Hf(HupX)(HupX)(HdnX). As indicated
in Table 2, reactions 6 and 7 have similar activation energy for
HupX dissociation, while the activation energy for H dnX
dissociation in reaction 8 is too high for this reaction to be
active in ALD. Hence, the proton rotations in HfX 3
conﬁgurations also change the dissociation rate.
The bonding between the Hf of the precursor and the low
coordinated O changes in response to proton diﬀusion from
the surface to the ligands and rotation of protonated ligand. For
instance, multiple proton diﬀusion decreases the Hf−O bond
length from 2.26 Å in HfX4 to 1.82 Å in Hf(HupX)(HupX)-
(HdnX)X, which is lower than the normal distance between Hf
and O in the bulk structure (2.17 Å). This eﬀect appears to be
primarily due to the proton diﬀusion from the surface to the
complex, while the rotation of the protonated ligand is only
slightly inﬂuential.
We observe that densiﬁcation is the primary energetic driving
force at the surface. Substantial energy gain can be seen to
accompany the formation of new Hf−O bonds in reactions 4−
8 in Table 2. Densi ﬁcation is reported here for a smooth
surface, where Hf of the precursor bonds to 3 or 4 oxygen
atoms at the surface. Densi ﬁcation may also happen in
subsurface layers during ALD growth, where Hf and O
rearrange so as to obtain more mutual bonding partners,
increasing their coordination and density closer to bulk values.
In this case, we expect that densi ﬁcation is even more
energetically favorable. This leads us to speculate that there
will also be a strong driving force for Hf and O ions, once freed
of ligands or protons, to migrate from the surface to subsurface
vacancies, thus densifying and completing those layers into
bulk-like HfO2. This would explain the excellent conformality
that is achieved in ALD, despite the submonolayer rate of
growth per cycle. Each ALD cycle thus consists of two
simultaneous modes of deposition: completion of high-density
subsurface layers and decoration of the surface with a low-
density ﬁlm. Of course, the situation may be diﬀerent during
the ﬁrst few cycles of“incubation” on a substrate.
On the basis of the computed energetics, HfX is the most
probable conﬁguration in the Hf pulse and desorption of this
ﬁnal HX is an endothermic reaction (Table 3 reaction 8). This
seems to be because HfX is relatively under-coordinated. One
bond from X and three or four bonds from oxygen (on a
smooth surface) make Hf four- orﬁve-coordinated. Desorption
of the last ligand only becomes possible if Hf can coordinate to
more oxygen, either during the oxygen pulse or by densiﬁcation
into a position with a higher number of surrounding oxygen
(Table 3, reactions 8−10). Because ideal ALD is symmetric
with respect to pulses, the energetics also allow us to identify
the most probable surface species saturating the surface at the
end of the H2O pulse. This is low-coordinated hydroxyl, with
just one bond to the surface, which resists any type of proton
transfer reaction (Table 1, reaction 1). Only during the next
precursor pulse does adsorption of HfX4 allow the coordination
number of such OH groups to increase, facilitating proton
transfer and densiﬁcation.
Our calculations show that the H2O molecule in the oxygen
pulse can only adsorb by attaching to a pair or cluster of
neighboring HfX, which is followed by decomposition of the
H2O molecule (Table 3 reaction 5). Adsorption of H2Ot oa
single HfX is not energetically favored (Figure 10), indicating
that the presence of X makes HfX a weak Lewis acid. Also, no
evidence of a direct reaction between a proton of the gas phase
H2O molecule and surface ligands was observed, again
conﬁrming that chemisorption is needed before HX elimi-
nation. If such clusters of HfX do not form in the Hf pulse,
which may happen at low temperature or on di ﬀerent
interfaces, then H2O cannot adsorb eﬃciently in the oxygen
pulse. In general, a low number of Lewis acid and base sites
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889887


after the Hf pulse lead to a low rate of H2O deposition in the O
pulse.
Repeated decomposition of H2O leads to an increase in c.n.
of Hf and O in the cluster. Simultaneously, the densiﬁcation of
Hf and O in the cluster causes a reduction in the barriers to HX
desorption (Table 3), and the rate of desorption of HX is
increased. For this reason, previously inert Hf(HX) can be
eliminated in the H2O pulse. Depletion of HX from the cluster
in turn allows further densiﬁcation: Hf gains c.n. up to 7 by
densiﬁcation with surrounding O while the oxygen obtains wide
range of c.n. from 1−4.
At this stage, the possibility of association of H+ +O H− into
H2O molecules is raised. According to our calculations,
terminal −OH2 with the low coordination of oxygen are
more likely to desorb than bridging−OH2, especially as the
temperature is raised. As noted previously, terminal O is the
most reactive toward HfX4 adsorption in the next Hf precursor
pulse, and so the rate of ALD growth per cycle would be
lowered as a result of the reduction in adsorption sites. In
addition, H 2O desorption depletes the surface of reactive
protons for ALD.
In our slab model, under-coordinated surface atoms (oxygen
in the hafnium pulse and hafnium in the oxygen pulse) change
the activation energies and free energies for reactions in their
vicinity, reactions such as desorption of ligands and ligand
exchange. Although they appear to be spectators in these
reactions, in fact these under-coordinated atoms strongly aﬀect
the reaction pathways and energetics, often changing them
from endothermic to exothermic reactions. For instance, the
substantial gain in energy during the densiﬁcation process is
from under-coordinated atoms. These under-coordinated
atoms are ignored in calculations using more limited models.5,6
■ CONCLUSION
In this paper, we used DFT slab models to investigate the ALD
reactions for growth of HfO2 from Hf(NMe2)4 and H2O. We
include all steps, from the early stage of adsorption of each
ALD precursor to the densiﬁcation of multiple atoms into bulk-
like HfO2 layers. The resulting reactions, which explain the
fundamental chemistry of ALD at low temperatures (below 500
K), are outlined below.
Adsorption. Chemisorption of precursors is only possible
at surface sites of suﬃcient Lewis activity, namely, terminal O
and OH for Hf(NMe2)4 and (Hf(NMe2))x (x ≥ 2) cluster (e.g.,
dimers) for H2O. Saturated surfaces do not have these sites and
so resist further adsorption. This explains the self-limiting
reactions that distinguish ALD from other techniques.
Multiple Proton Diﬀusion. We propose the diﬀusion of
multiple protons to the amide ligands of the Hf precursor
before desorption of protonated ligands takes place. The
activation energy calculations show that repeated proton
diﬀusion from the surface to the amide ligand and rotation of
the protonated amine is more energetically accessible than the
simple elimination of the amine in the initial stage. Due to
multiple proton diﬀusion to the fragments, the dative bonds
between Hf and N are weakened. This reduction in bond
strength facilitates the desorption of fragments from the
precursor. The resulting activation energies for protonation
and desorption of ligands are low enough that these reactions
can take place in low temperature ALD. Multiple proton
diﬀusion is seen in all the stages of ligand elimination.
Densiﬁcation. Loss of a proton from oxygen frees it up for
bonding to Hf of the precursor. Protonation of ligands, and
especially desorption of ligands, frees up Hf for bonding to
surface oxygen. Decomposition of H 2O at the surface also
increases the coordination of Hf and O. These e ﬀects are
termed “densiﬁcation”, as they bring Hf−O packing closer to
the bulk scenario. Densi ﬁcation is hence accompanied by
substantial energy gain, and this can be the driving force that
facilitates ligand eliminations at the surface and vacancyﬁlling
in subsurface layers. Densiﬁcation thus accounts for some of the
important characteristics of ALD, such as conformal growth.
Saturated Surfaces. During the early stage of the metal
pulse, due to the saturation of the surface by remaining
fragments HfX, adsorption of further metal precursor stops.
The presence of these fragments prevents further chemisorp-
tion of HfX4, since this requires the creation of a strong dative
bond between Hf and O. A separate eﬀect is depletion of
coreagent (protons) at the surface as HX desorbs. Clearly, no
further elimination of HX is possible once protons are
exhausted. If the surface can store a higher population of
coreagent, then a higher growth rate is expected.27 Next, during
the H2O pulse, Hf exchanges its remaining ligands with OH
groups. The exchange occurs due to the decomposition of
adsorbed H2O molecules in clusters of HfX. Simultaneously,
low coordinated oxygen atoms appear at the surface, which are
reactive sites for the next metal pulse. With saturation of the
surface by OH groups, H2O molecules begin to appear. These
molecules are loosely bonded to the surface and readily desorb,
reducing the growth rate, especially at high temperatures.
It can thus be seen that a wide variety of reactions can take
place simultaneously on the surface during ALD. Competition
between the elimination reactions and proton di ﬀusion
reactions at diﬀerent ALD temperatures and their inﬂuence
on the conformality of theﬁlm are interesting issues that we are
currently investigating by incorporating these DFT data into
kinetic Monte Carlo modeling.
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: mahdi.shirazi@tyndall.ie.
Notes
The authors declare no competingﬁnancial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support from the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI)
strategic research cluster “Functional Oxides and Related
Materials for Electronics ” (FORME) is gratefully acknowl-
edged, www.tyndall.ie/forme . The authors also wish to
acknowledge the SFI/HEA Irish Centre for High-End
Computing (ICHEC) for the provision of computational
facilities and support.
■ REFERENCES
(1) Hurley, P. K.; O'Connor, E.; Monaghan, S.; Long, R.; O'Mahony,
A.; Povey, I. M.; Cherkaoui, K.; MacHale, J.; Quinn, A.; Brammertz,
G.; et al.ECS Trans. 2009, 25, 113−127.
(2) Puurunen, R. L.J. Appl. Phys.2005, 97, 121301.
(3) Delabie, A.; Caymax, M.; Brijs, B.; Brunco, D.; Conard, T.;
Sleeckx, E.; Ragnarsson, L.-A.; Van Elshocht, S.; De Gendt, S.; Heyns,
M. ECS Trans. 2006, 1, 433−446.
(4) Hausmann, D. M.; Kim, E.; Becker, J.; Gordon, R. G.Chem.
Mater. 2002, 14, 4350−4358.
(5) Jeloaica, L.; Esteve, A.; Rouhani, M. D.; Esteve, D.Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2003, 83, 542−544.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889888


(6) Widjaja, Y.; Musgrave, C. B.J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 1931−
1934.
(7) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Musgrave, C. B.; Sanz, J. F.J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 2008, 130, 11996−12006.
(8) Cho, M.; Park, H. B.; Park, J.; Lee, S. W.; Hwang, C. S.; Jang, G.
H.; Jeong, J.Appl. Phys. Lett.2003, 83, 5503−5505.
(9) Olivier, S.; Ducere, J.-M.; Mastail, C.; Landa, G.; Esteve, A.;
Rouhani, M. D.Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 1555−1560.
(10) Elliott, S. D.Langmuir 2010, 26, 9179−9182.
(11) Kohn, W.; Becke, A. D.; Parr, R. G.J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100,
12974−12980.
(12) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J.Phys. Rev. B1993, 47, 558−561.
(13) Harris, J.Phys. Rev. B1985, 31, 1770−1779.
(14) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M.Phys. Rev. Lett.1996, 77,
3865−3868.
(15) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J.J. Phys.: Condens. Matter1994, 6, 8245.
(16) Payne, M. C.; Teter, M. P.; Allan, D. C.; Arias, T. A.;
Joannopoulos, J. D.Rev. Mod. Phys.1992, 64, 1045−1097.
(17) Elliott, S. D.; Greer, J. C.J. Mater. Chem.2004, 14, 3246−3250.
(18) Zhao, X.; Vanderbilt, D.Phys. Rev. B2002, 65, 233106.
(19) Aarik, J.; Aidla, A.; Kiisler, A.-A.; Uustare, T.; Sammelselg, V.
Thin Solid Films1999, 340, 110−116.
(20) Mukhopadhyay, A. B.; Sanz, J. F.; Musgrave, C. B.Chem. Mater.
2006, 18, 3397−3403.
(21) Monkhorst, H. J.; Pack, J. D.Phys. Rev. B1976, 13, 5188−5192.
(22) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J.Phys. Rev. B1994, 49, 14251−14269.
(23) Ruggerone, P.; Ratsch, C.; Scheﬄer, M. Chapter 13 Density-
functional theory of epitaxial growth of metals. In Growth and
Properties of Ultrathin Epitaxial Layers; King, D., Woodruﬀ, D., Eds.;
Elsevier: 1997; Vol.8, pp 490−544.
(24) Henkelman, G.; Uberuaga, B. P.; Jonsson, H. J. Chem. Phys.
2000, 113, 9901−9904.
(25) Henkelman, G.; Jonsson, H.J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 9978−
9985.
(26) Zydor, A.; Kessler, V. G.; Elliott, S. D.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2012, 14, 7954−7964.
(27) Weinreich, W.; Tauchnitz, T.; Polakowski, P.; Drescher, M.;
Riedel, S.; Sundqvist, J.; Seidel, K.; Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S. D.; Ohsiek,
S.; Erben, E.; Trui, B.J. Vacuum Sci. Technol. A2013, 31, 01A123.
Chemistry of Materials Article
dx.doi.org/10.1021/cm303630e | Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889889
