Kinetic Monte Carlo Study of the Atomic Layer Deposition of Zinc
Oxide
Timo Weckman,† Mahdi Shirazi,‡ Simon D. Elliott,§ and Kari Laasonen*,†
†School of Chemical Technology, Aalto University, Espoo 02150, Finland
‡Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven 5612 AZ, Netherlands
§Schrödinger Inc., 120 West 45th Street, New York, NY 10036-4041, USA
*S Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has emerged as an
important technique for thin- ﬁlm deposition in the last two
decades. Zinc oxide thinﬁlms, usually grown via diethylzinc (DEZ)
and water process, have seen much interest both in application and
in theoretical research. The surface processes related to the growth
of the thinﬁlm are not entirely understood, and the conceptual
picture of the ALD process has been contradicted by recent
experiments where ligands from the zinc pulse persist on the
surface even after extended water pulse exposures. In this work, we
investigate the overall growth of the zinc oxide thinﬁlms grown via
DEZ/H2O process by modeling the surface chemistry usingﬁrst-
principles kinetic Monte Carlo for theﬁrst time. The kinetic Monte Carlo allows us to implement density functional theory
calculations conducted on the zinc oxide (100) surface into a kinetic model and extract data directly comparable to
experimental measurements. The temperature-dependent growth proﬁle obtained from our model is in good qualitative
agreement with the experimental data. The onset of thin-ﬁlm growth is oﬀset from the experimental data because of the
underestimation of the reaction barriers within density functional theory. The growth per cycle of the depositedﬁlm is
overestimated by 18% in the kinetic model. Mass gain during an ALD cycle is in qualitative agreement with the experimental
quartz-crystal microbalance data. The main mass gain within an ALD cycle is obtained during the DEZ pulse and mass change
during the water pulse is negligible. The cause of lowﬁlm growth at low temperatures is due to the high reaction barriers for
ethyl-elimination during the water pulse. This kinetic barrier results in lowﬁlm growth as no new DEZ can adsorb to the ethyl-
saturated surface. At elevated temperatures, ethyl-elimination becomes accessible, resulting in the ideal layer-by-layer growth of
theﬁlm. However, a large fraction of ethyl-ligands persist on the surface after each ALD cycle even at high temperatures. This
results in ethyl-ligands being encapsulated into theﬁlm lattice. This is likely due to an incomplete set of reaction pathways, and
it is likely that some yet unidentiﬁed process is responsible for the elimination of the ethyl-ligands from the surface as the
deposition process progresses.
■ INTRODUCTION
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) has become an important
nanoscale fabrication technique for depositing thinﬁlms in the
recent decades. ALD is based on sequential, self-terminating
gas−solid reactions resulting in uniform, pin-hole free thin
ﬁlms. The reactant gases, precursors, are introduced into the
reactor chamber separately, thus avoiding any intermolecular
gas-phase reactions. After the surface is saturated with the
precursor, the remaining precursors and reaction by-products
are purged from the reactor with an inert gas. Because of the
self-terminating nature of the surface reactions, theﬁlm
thickness can be controlled with extreme precision.1
Zinc oxide is a semiconductor with various useful properties,
for example, high transparency, tunable electrical conductivity,
and piezoelectric properties. Zinc oxide has therefore seen
application in transistors, solar cells, and sensors in the recent
decades, and as the dimensions of microscopic devices have
decreased, the interest in depositing zinc oxide thinﬁlms via
ALD has increased.2−4
First-principles kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulations on
the ALD growth of zinc oxide have not previously been
studied, although kMC has been used to study the ALD of
HfO2, ZrO2, and Al2O3 thin ﬁlms.5−8 In their study on the
deposition of HfO2 and ZrO2 ﬁlms, Deminsky et al.5 were able
to reproduce the correct temperature dependence of the
growth rate of theﬁlm and also to describe the accumulation of
chloride atoms in the growing thinﬁlm. Dkhissi et al.7,8 also
studied deposition of HfO2. Heterodeposition of Al2O3 on Si
has been studied by Mazaleyrat et al.6 However, all of these
studies have used activation energies extracted from cluster
Received: July 18, 2018
Revised: October 29, 2018
Published: October 30, 2018
Article
pubs.acs.org/JPCCCite This: J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
© 2018 American Chemical Society 27044 DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
Downloaded via LEIBNIZ UNIVERSITAET HANNOVER on December 6, 2024 at 12:57:53 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


model density functional theory (DFT) calculations, neglect-
ing the complicated surface environment.
Shirazi and Elliott9 constructed their kMC model of the
Hf(N(CH 3)2)4/H2Op r o c e s sf o rH f O2 ALD on DFT
calculations conducted using a periodic slab model. The
model accounted for the steric demand of the ligands and
included the cooperative eﬀects of the neighboring adsorbates
on the reaction barriers. The growth rates obtained from the
model were within 20% of experimental data.
In this work, we present theﬁrst kMC study on the ALD
growth of zinc oxide thinﬁlms. The kMC application for ALD
was previously developed by Shirazi and Elliott.9 The kinetic
model is based on DFT calculations of the ALD reactions of
diethyl zinc (DEZ)10 and water11 on the zinc oxide (100)
surface. DEZ/H2O is the most common process used to
deposit ZnO thinﬁlms.
The assumed reaction steps for the DEZ/H2O process are
OH Zn(CH CH )
O Zn(CH CH ) CH CH
23 2
23 3 3
∥− +
→∥− − + (1)
O Zn(CH CH ) H O
OZ n O HC H C H
23 2
3 3
∥− − +
→∥− − + (2)
The dominant end product from the adsorption of DEZ is
considered to be monoethylzinc (MEZ). Ideally, the
subsequent water pulse should remove the ethyl-ligands from
the surface before the next DEZ pulse. This holds for
deposition temperatures of 200°C and beyond but, as
shown by Mackus et al.,12 at low temperatures, a substantial
proportion of the ethyl-ligands remain on the surface after the
water pulse. From their in situ Fourier transform infrared
(FTIR) spectroscopy measurements, the authors conclude that
at 150°C, after a typical water exposure, 50% of the surface
ethyl-ligands remain on the surface. Even after extended
periods of water exposure, approximately 16% of surface ethyl-
ligands persist on the surface.
The presence of persistent ligands has also been observed by
Vandalon and Kessels13,14 during the deposition of Al2O3 via
trimethylaluminium and water process. They propose two
possible models accounting for the persistent ligands: either
there are ligands that react diﬀerently with water or the water
pulse kinetics that are coverage-dependent. The authorsﬁnd
support for the coverage-dependent elimination of the ligands
on DFT calculations by Shirazi and Elliott.15
In a DFT study10 on the mechanism of adsorption and
surface reactions of DEZ on hydroxylated zinc oxide surface,
the activation energy for the ligand elimination reaction1
between adsorbed DEZ and a surface hydroxyl group/
molecular water is reported to be low, ranging from 0.23 to
0.47 eV on the planar surface. The activation energy for
removing the ligand from a MEZ surface fragment is
signiﬁcantly higher. In DFT calculations on surface reactions
during the subsequent water pulse,11 the ligands were found to
be nonreactive toward ligand elimination with water molecules.
Only a weak ligand-coverage dependency on the reaction
barriers was observed. A pyrolysis of DEZ/MEZ has also been
proposed in the literature,16 but based on DFT calculations,
the pyrolysis of ethyl-ligands has a large barrier of 2 eV or
above.
In this work, the ALD of zinc oxide via DEZ/H2O process is
modeled using a ﬁrst-principles kMC model. The extensive
DFT calculations on the surface reactions are implemented
into an on-lattice kMC code previously developed by Shirazi
and Elliott.9 Alongside the DFT activation energies, some
processes with ad hoc parameters are introduced. The
sensitivity of the model to the choice of parameters and
DFT calculations is discussed.
The kMC model is used to simulate homodeposition of a
zinc oxide thinﬁlm. The self-terminating growth, characteristic
of ALD, is observed. The impact of deposition temperature on
the growth per cycle (GPC) of theﬁlm is found to be in
qualitative, and to a lesser extent quantitative, agreement with
experimental data. Because of the inertness of surface ethyl-
ligands, a large fraction of surface ethyl-ligands are found to
persist on the surface after each ALD cycle and these ligands
are found to produce impurities into the lattice structure of the
ﬁlm.
■ COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
The chemical reactions of ZnO ALD via DEZ/H 2O are
implemented into the stochastic parallel PARticle kinetic
simulator (SPPARKS).17,18 The ALD application in SPPARKS
has been developed by Shirazi and Elliott9 and was used to
study the ALD growth of HfO2. In the ALD application, the
state-to-state evolution of the system is propagated by the
Bortz−Kalos−Lebowitz (BKL) algorithm.19 Activation ener-
gies used to compute the rate constants were adopted from
DFT calculations presented in refs10 and 11
The BKL algorithm is a computationally eﬃcient algorithm
for simulating the time evolution of a reaction network
consisting of discrete reaction steps by stochastically sampling
the network. In the beginning of each step, the total sum of the
rate constants for all of the possible events available in the
initial conﬁguration is computed
kk
i
N
itot
1
∑=
= (3)
Two random numbers,ρ1 and ρ2, are then generated. Theﬁrst
random number, ρ1 is used to select an eventj satisfying
kk k
i
j
i
i
j
i
1
1
1 tot
1
∑∑ ρ≤≤
=
−
= (4)
The selected event is executed, and the event list is updated.
Usually, the executed event aﬀects a limited number of other
events in the network, and only few events are added or
removed from the event list. After the execution, the
simulation time is advanced by
t t k
ln( )2
tot
ρ=−
(5)
If the simulation time has not advanced over a predetermined
threshold, the procedure starts from the beginning. The step
size is independent of the executed event, but it does depend
on the total sumktot of the rate coeﬃcients. This means that
when fast events (i.e., events with large rate coe ﬃcients)
dominate the event list, the system clock advances slowly. A
case in point is the diﬀusion of protons on the surface from
one oxygen to another. These kinds of events slow down the
overall simulation, and measures may need to be taken (such
as artiﬁcially increasing the activation energy) to decrease the
rates of these events.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27045


Because of the use of an approximate density functional in
the DFT studies, the calculated activation energies obtained
are underestimated. This is because of the well-known over-
delocalization of the electron density by approximate density
functionals. This underestimation produces an error in the
absolute values of the reaction barriers. However, assuming
that the trends between diﬀerent processes are correct, the
executed sequence of diﬀerent processes will give reasonable
description of the surface reactions. The lower reaction barriers
lead to faster surface dynamics, and the surface saturation can
be expected to occur in shorter simulation time and at lower
temperatures. Subsequent approximations to the reaction rates,
such as the adsorption rate, will be conducted in the same
direction, that is, to overestimate the rates.
The model implemented here follows the setup of Shirazi
and Elliott,9 and the mechanisms considered can be divided
into the following subsets: adsorption and desorption of the
gaseous precursors, ligand elimination reactions between DEZ
and surface oxygen sites, ligand elimination reactions between
MEZ and surface oxygen sites, proton di ﬀusion between
oxygen sites, and densiﬁcation of adsorbed Zn/O-containing
fragments to the corresponding sublattices. In the current
implementation, the densiﬁcation of the surface species is
modiﬁed to be ligand concentration-dependent.
The adsorption rates are obtained from the kinetic gas
theory, whereas the surface reactions and desorption
mechanisms are based on conventional transition-state theory
in the harmonic approximation.20 Although the activation
energies for the ALD reactions are obtained from DFT, the
rates for the proton diﬀusion and densiﬁcation reactions in our
model are not directly calculated using DFT. We assume,
based on ab initio molecular dynamic simulations of the
system, that these processes are fast and assign ad hoc
activation energies for these processes. However, the bulk of
the simulation time is consumed in the proton diﬀusion
between oxygens and in order to reduce the overall simulation
time, the ad hoc barriers for proton diﬀusion are increased
artiﬁcially.21 The eﬀects of this approximation are small and are
discussed in theSupporting Information.
The kMC model is an on-lattice model where a wurtzite zinc
oxide lattice is given as an input for the algorithm, and hence,
in the course of the simulation, a ZnO lattice is reproduced.
Each lattice site in the framework represents an atom or a
molecule. A ZnO(100) surface facet covered with water
molecules is used as the initial state of the simulation. Because
the lattice structure is preset in our simulation, we cannot
determine whether an amorphousﬁlm grows or which crystal
phase is obtained.
Each lattice site is de ﬁned by its site number, type,
coordination number (cn), and a neighbor list . The lattice
model is illustrated in Figure 1.D iﬀerent site types are
enumerated, that is, each type is assigned an integer value to
distinguish it from the other types. The diﬀerent site types are
tabulated in Table 1. The ethyl-ligands in DEZ and MEZ are
abbreviated as X.
In the wurtzite lattice, each cation and anion site has a cn of
4. The cation−anion sites alternate in the lattice, dividing the
total lattice into metal and oxygen sublattices. Because of the
alternation, the ﬁrst nearest neighbor j of each metal site i
belongs to the oxygen sublattice and the second nearest
neighbor belongs to the metal sublattice. We will use the
sublattice framework throughout the text.
The cn corresponds to the number of covalent bonds the
zinc/oxygen site has formed. The cn is the sum of the occupied
ﬁrst nearest neighbor sites, and, in the case of a zinc lattice site,
the cn also contains the number of ligands. Protons are not
included in the cn. As an example, a MEZ site, ZnX, that has
twoﬁrst neighbor oxygen sites occupied has a cn of 3 (2 for
oxygens, 1 from ligand). A water molecule, OH2, that has one
of itsﬁrst neighbor zinc sites occupied has a cn of 1 (1 from
zinc, none from the protons).
Figure 1. Two-dimensional approximation of the lattice network of
kMC used here to illustrate the reaction network on the lattice
framework. The actual lattice is 3D, and theﬁrst neighbors of a given
site i share only one neighbor in common instead of two as is depicted
here. The lattice is subject to periodic boundary conditions. The
metal and oxygen sites alternate in the lattice (metal sites are colored
by light gray, oxygen sites with red). Each zinc and oxygen site is four-
coordinated in a tetrahedral conﬁguration. Each site is deﬁned by its
location in the lattice, type, cn, and neighbor list. The cn is shown
below each lattice box. The bottom row in theﬁgure is the bulk-phase
(Zn with cn 4). The bulk is inert, i.e., no process is deﬁned for sites
with cn 4. Initially, the surface is covered with low-coordinated
hydroxyl groups. Above the surface is the gas phase that is initially
ﬁlled with vacant (VAC) lattice sites. As the deposition process
continues, the simulation produces a crystalline ZnO lattice with
some lattice defects.
Table 1. Diﬀerent Site Types Used in the Model with
Descriptionsa
enumeration type description
0 VACANCY an empty site of no type
1 O an oxygen atom
2 OH a hydroxyl group
3 OH2 a surface water molecule
4 ZnX2O oxygen atom with an adsorbed DEZ molecule
5 ZnX2OH hydroxyl group with an adsorbed DEZ
molecule
6 ZnX2OH2 water molecule with an adsorbed DEZ
molecule
7 ZnXO MEZ on an oxygen atom
8 ZnXOH MEZ on a hydroxyl group
9 ZnO a zinc atom on an oxygen atom
10 ZnOH a zinc atom on a hydroxyl group
11 Zn a zinc atom
12 ZnX a MEZ group
13 OH2Zn water molecule adsorbed to a zinc atom
14 OH2ZnX water molecule adsorbed to a MEZ group
15 OHZn hydroxyl group on a zinc atom
16 OHZnX hydroxyl group on a MEZ group
17 OZn oxygen atom on a zinc atom
aEach site type is assigned an integer and a corresponding string,
where the X stands for the C2H5 group. Vacant sites are present in
both zinc and oxygen sublattices. Sites 1−10 exists exclusively in the
oxygen sublattice and sites 11 −17 exist exclusively in the zinc
sublattice.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27046


The neighbor list contains the indices of theﬁrst neighbors
of a given site. This list is used to navigate through the lattice
network. No reference to the real space location is used in the
model. The neighbor list does not contain information on the
relative positions of the neighboring sites (e.g., which neighbor
is above or below the site in question), and the sites only react
with respect to their nearest or second nearest neighbors in the
lattice. The type, cn, and the neighbors of a given site are used
to deﬁne what events are possible for that site.
The distinguishing feature of an ALD process is the
separation of the reactants into two gas pulses divided by a
purging of the reactor chamber. This alternation of the
precursor pulses is implemented in our model by a time-
dependent variable that switches the adsorption of DEZ and
H2O on and oﬀ. Only the adsorption processes are time-
dependent. The length of each pulse/purge can be deﬁned
separately.
The default simulation box consists of 5120 lattice sites with
xyz-dimensions of 26.8 × 41.7 × 58.0 in Å. The number of
events executed in the simulations depends exponentially on
the simulation temperature and range from 105 events (300 K)
to 108 events (450 K) requiring simulation time from few
hundred seconds at the very low temperatures to dozens of
hours at elevated temperatures. Several product runs with
diﬀerent random seeds are conducted for each simulation. The
data presented in the result are the average over a set of
simulations. A larger simulation box of 10 240 sites with
dimensions of 53.6× 83.3 × 29.0 (in Å) was used to check
that the results were size-consistent.
Mechanisms Included in the Model.Chemical reactions
in the kMC model are deﬁned as discrete events, and three
diﬀerent event types are incorporated in the model. Each event
includes a given sitei and possibly itsﬁrst or second nearest
neighbor, sitesj or k, respectively. The type of events is sorted
as below:
 Event I: in this event, the type of a given site i
transforms to another type, for example, in the
adsorption of DEZ onto surface water
ii
event IOH2
site
ZnX2OH2
site⎯→⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ (6)
Often the cn of the site is also updated. In this instance,
the cn of the oxygen site is increased by 1 as a new Zn−
O bond is formed.
 Event II: an event between the sitei and asecond nearest
neighbor site k, for example, a ligand elimination reaction
between an adsorbed DEZ and a surface hydroxyl group
i k i k
event IIOH
site
ZnX2OH2
site
O
site
ZnXOH2
site
+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(7)
The proton of the hydroxyl group and the ethyl-ligands
from DEZ combine to form an ethane molecule that
readily desorbs from the surface. The cn of either site is
not aﬀected by the reaction. The protons do not
contribute to the cn of the OH site, and the bonding of
oxygenon the ZnX2OH2/ZnXOH2 site that resides on
the oxygen sublatticeis not changed. In general, the types
on both sitesi and k need not change.
 Event III: the event is described as a process between
the sitei and thefirst nearest neighborsite j, for example,
a densiﬁcation process (see sectionSteric Hindrance and
Densiﬁcation) where a ZnX group moves from the
oxygen site to a vacant site on the metal sublattice
event IIIVAC ZnXOH2 ZnX OH2
ij i jsite site site site
+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(8)
cn’s of each site participating in the event as well as
those of all of the neighbors are updated accordingly.
Again, in a general case, the types of both sitesi and j
need not change in the event.
Next, we will describe the diﬀerent mechanisms used in the
model based on DFT calculations,10,11 along with illustrations
of the lattice structure during the progression of the simulation.
Adsorption and Surface Reaction of DEZ.The metal
pulse starts with the adsorption of DEZ onto the surface. The
DEZ adsorption is anevent I process
ii
event IOH
site
ZnX2OH
site⎯→⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ (9)
The lattice model for this process is illustrated inFigure 2.
DEZ can adsorb to water and hydroxyl groups on the
surface. On the basis of the DFT calculations on DEZ pulse10
on planar and stepped surfaces, DEZ can adsorb to 1-
coordinated (planar surface) and 2-coordinated oxygens
(stepped surface). DEZ can be adsorbed onto O, OH, and
OH2 sites with cn’s 1 or 2 and to bare oxygen with cn 3 (see
the Supporting Information for the additional DFT calcu-
lations conducted for the model). As there will be large proton
mobility in our model, we do not make distinctions between
water and hydroxyl groups. For all of the 1- and 2-coordinated
O, OH, and OH2 sites, an adsorption energy of−0.74 eV will
be used. For DEZ adsorption to 3-coordinated bare oxygen,
the adsorption energy is somewhat larger,−1.11 eV.
The rate of adsorption can be obtained from the molecular
ﬂux of the kinetic gas theory
k PT
mk T
A(,)
2
ads
B
σθ
π
=
(10)
where P is the partial pressure of DEZ, σ is the sticking
coeﬃcient, kB is the Boltzmann constant,T is the temperature,
Figure 2.Lattice model illustration for the adsorption of DEZ onto a hydroxyl group ineq 9. DEZ adsorption invokes the mask function, which
decreases the cn of the neighboring zinc and oxygen sites by−10. The mask function allows tracking how many DEZ/MEZ groups are within the
vicinity of a given site, and an oxygen site may be rendered inaccessible to DEZ adsorption if surrounded by too many ligands. See sectionSteric
Hindrance and Densiﬁcation for further details.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27047


and A is the area through which theﬂux passes. The sticking
coeﬃcient σ depends on the temperature and surface coverage
θ and is close to unity for an empty surface whenθ = 0. The
area A is approximated here by the density of the reactive sites
in the DFT calculations conducted on the planar zinc oxide
surface. For DEZ, the approximate adsorption site area is 0.18
nm2 per oxygen site on the surface, and for water, the
adsorption site area is 0.14 nm2 per zinc site at the surface.
This type of adsorption rate implicitly assumes that the
adsorbed molecule retains two-dimensional translational
degree of freedom as well as all of the rotational and
vibrational states.20 This leads to an overestimation of the
overall adsorption rate as the molecule is likely to lose at least
some of its translational entropy. However, the extent to which
the adsorbed molecule loses its entropy is not entirely clear as
recent experimental data 22 on the entropy of adsorbed
molecules shows. In any case, the overestimation of the
adsorption rate is an approximation in favor of the thin-ﬁlm
growth. In a similar fashion, the sticking coeﬃcient σ in eq 10
is set to unity regardless of the temperature for sites where the
ethyl-coverage is low and the adsorption of DEZ is allowed.
The sticking coeﬃcient is zero for sites blocked by ethyl-
ligands.
On the basis of DFT calculations, the DEZ adsorption is not
greatly hindered by a single DEZ or MEZ close to the
adsorption site; therefore, adsorption is permitted barrierlessly
if a single MEZ is situated close to an oxygen group susceptible
for adsorption. The steric eﬀects between DEZ and several
MEZ groups are managed by themask function discussed in
section Steric Hindrance and Densiﬁcation below.
After the DEZ has adsorbed, it can either desorb or react
with other surface species. We assume that during deposition,
the adsorption will reach an equilibrium, so the desorption
process can be considered as a chemical reaction where the
adsorbed molecule escapes into the gas phase. Then, the
desorption rate is obtained as
k kT
h e Ek T
des
B /ads B= −| |
(11)
In desorption of a molecule, the adsorption energy serves as a
reaction barrier for barrierless adsorption.
A separate coordO-function is de ﬁned to prevent the
adsorption of DEZ onto the subsurface of a grownﬁlm. The
coordO-function is executed in the case of DEZ desorption
and oxygen densiﬁcation. The function calculates the relative
occupation of the neighboring sites on the oxygen sublattice
around a given oxygen site. If the oxygen site is surrounded by
occupied sites, DEZ adsorption to this site is deemed
inaccessible. The function operates as follows: it calculates
the number of occupied (i.e., not vacant) second nearest
neighbor sites of the given oxygen site and if over 80% of these
sites are occupied, the oxygen site is deemed inaccessible to
adsorption. The function then artiﬁcially decreases the cn of
the oxygen site in question by−20 rendering it inactive for
adsorption process. However, the oxygen site can still
participate in proton diﬀusion because these events are deﬁned
for low cn oxygens as well.
The adsorbed DEZ can react with protons on surface oxygen
sites to release ethane. On the basis of our DFT calculations,
the reaction pathway for the ligand elimination reaction occurs
between an adsorbed DEZ and a neighboring hydroxyl site. As
with the adsorption process, we treat the hydroxyl and water
sites as equally reactive.
The DEZ is adsorbed onto an oxygen site and needs to
accept a proton from an oxygen site. The reaction happens
between the DEZ site and a second nearest neighbor oxygen
and is therefore anevent II process, described as
event IIOH ZnX2OH O ZnXO H
ik i ksite site site site
+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ + (12)
The mechanism on the lattice structure is illustrated inFigure
3. The reaction barrier for the removal of the ethyl from DEZ
adsorbed to 1- or 2-coordinated oxygen is 0.47 eV. The
desorption of reaction by-products (ethane) is assumed to be
irreversible and barrierless, so it is not explicitly included as a
separate process and a reverse reaction is omitted. For a DEZ
adsorbed onto a 3-coordinated oxygen, the reaction barrier is
larger, 0.89 eV.
In addition to ligand elimination reaction, the DEZ can also
dissociate on the surface. In our calculations on a DEZ bonded
to a 3-coordinated oxygen (see theSupporting Information),
the DEZ was able to donate a ligand to a bare zinc atom with a
low barrier. The dissociation of DEZ in the model is deﬁned
for a DEZ bonded to a 3-coordinated bare oxygen located
close to a bare zinc atom. The dissociation is deﬁned for low
ethyl-coverage and has a very low barrier of 0.10 eV.
After the DEZ has lost itsﬁrst ligand, the resulting MEZ
needs to jump from the oxygen sublattice onto the zinc
sublattice of the target ZnO material. This process is discussed
in the next section.
Steric Hindrance and Densi ﬁcation. The steric
hindrance between surface ligands is an important phenom-
enon that needs to be incorporated into the model. Steric
hindrance sets a limit to how many DEZ and MEZ groups can
be present on the surface at any given time, which is crucial if
the adsorption of the precursors is to be self-limiting. Assuming
that the adsorbed DEZ molecule may freely rotate on the
surface, the steric repulsion between adsorbants is the same in
all directions and the steric eﬀect can be taken into account by
a repulsion sphere the adsorbed molecule projects around
itself. The same is true for MEZ fragments.
This steric repulsion is incorporated into the model by the
mask function. The mask function artiﬁcially reduces the cn of
the neighboring sites by 10. This way it is possible to keep
track of how many ligands are within a vicinity of a given site
from the cn of a site and make adsorption and densiﬁcation
processes ethyl-density-dependent.
Figure 3. Illustration of the ligand elimination reaction between an adsorbed DEZ and a neighboring hydroxyl group.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27048


An example of the eﬀect of the mask function is illustrated in
Figure 2 . The mask function decreases the cn of the
surrounding zinc and oxygen sites. If the cn of an oxygen
site is low enough, the site is rendered inactive for adsorption.
DFT calculations10 show that two neighboring DEZ molecules
have a small e ﬀect on the relative adsorption energies.
Adsorption is therefore allowed onto sites with cn−9, −8,
and −7 (one MEZ group in close proximity) in addition to
sites with cn’s of 1, 2, and 3. However, the adsorption bond is
weakened by 0.09 eV as per our calculations. Adsorption to
sites cn lower than−9 is not allowed as the steric interaction
inhibits adsorption. With the help of the mask function, the
maximum surface ethyl-conc entration can be controlled
because the mask function limits both adsorption of DEZ
onto the surface and densiﬁcation of MEZ onto the metal
sublattice.
Densification is an event in which an adsorbed metal
(oxygen) group jumps from the oxygen (metal) sublattice onto
a vacancy in the metal (oxygen) sublattice. The process is
illustrated in Figure 4. After the adsorbed DEZ reacts with an
oxygen site, the MEZ fragment resides on to the oxygen
sublattice as a ZnXOH site. In this example, there are two
vacant (VAC) sites on the zinc sublattice next to the ZnXOH
group. Densi ﬁcation can occur to both sites with equal
probability. The densi ﬁcation mechanism is an event III
process described by the equation
i j i j
event IIIVAC
site
ZnXOH
site
ZnX
site
OH
site+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(13)
and is dependent on the cn of the vacant site. In the
densiﬁcation event, the MEZ fragment is removed from the
oxygen sublattice and placed onto a vacancy on the zinc
sublattice, resulting in an alternating cation−anion structure.
The densiﬁcation process is made ethyl-coverage dependent
by using the cn of the vacant site as an indicator of how many
ethyl-ligands are located close to the vacant site. An ad hoc
barrier is then used for the densiﬁcation process so as to
include ethyl−ethyl repulsion and make the ethyl groups avoid
one another. The barrier is higher for processes where the cn
of the vacant site is negative, that is, when the vacant site is
surrounded by ligands. This means that, given the choice, the
densiﬁcation of a MEZ group will occur to a vacant site that
has fewer ethyl-ligands in its vicinity. In this way, the zinc
fragments prefer to densify to regions with fewer ethyl-ligands
present, minimizing steric interaction. Densiﬁcation is allowed
Figure 4.Densiﬁcation of ZnX group from the oxygen sublattice to the zinc sublattice. The ZnX group has a choice between the two vacant sites
denoted by VAC.
Figure 5.Example case of the process leading to ethyl-saturation during the DEZ pulse and the use of the mask function. (a) DEZ adsorbs to an
oxygen site close to the MEZ. (b) DEZ reacts with a surface oxygen site. One of the ethyl-ligands is removed, resulting in another MEZ species on
the surface. (c) New MEZ needs to densify to the zinc sublattice. However, because of the presence of another ZnX group, the new MEZ has a
choice of two possible vacant sites. The barrier to the vacant site with cn−10 is lower than that for the vacant site with cn−20, and hence, the
MEZ prefers the site with cn−10 and prefers to distance itself from the other MEZ group.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27049


to vacant sites with cn as low as−30, that is, to sites with at
most three MEZ sites in their vicinity. If there are no vacant
sites with allowed cn nearby, then no densiﬁcation occurs and
the MEZ fragment remains on the oxygen sublattice until some
ethyl-ligands are eliminated.
As an illustration for the densiﬁcation process at higher
ethyl-coverage, consider the adsorption of an additional DEZ
onto the surface in ourﬁrst example. This process is illustrated
in Figure 5. A second DEZ adsorbs to surface oxygen close to a
previously densiﬁed ZnX (Figure 5a). The DEZ undergoes a
ligand elimination reaction resulting in a ZnXO group (Figure
5b). Now, this new MEZ has two possible sites onto which
densify: a vacant site with cn−10 and a second, more hindered
vacant site with cn−20 (Figure 5c). The latter site has a lower
cn because of the fact that both ZnX and a ZnXO groups are in
its vicinity.
The barrier for densiﬁcation to a vacant site with cn−10 is
0.30 eV, and to a site with cn−20, it is 0.40 eV. For a vacant
site with cn−30, the barrier increases to 0.50 eV. All of these
processes are fast within the process conditions; however, the
increasing trend in the densiﬁcation barriers ensures that MEZ
groups tend to avoid one another if given the choice. In our
example above, the ZnXO prefers to jump to the site with cn
−10 because of the lower barrier.
The ethyl-concentration on the surface can be controlled by
the lowest cn allowed for the densiﬁcation process. We have
used the ethyl-concentration limit of 7.1 ethyl nm−2 from our
DFT calculations10 to calibrate the densiﬁcation process. This
limit is generally achieved in the kMC simulations when the
lowest vacant site cn for densiﬁcation is −30. Further details
on the densiﬁcation limit are presented in the Supporting
Information.
After densiﬁcation, the cn of the newly occupied site and its
ﬁrst neighbors are updated accordingly. In the densiﬁcation of
ZnX species, the ligand is taken into account in the cn, that is,
a ZnX site with cn 3 is coordinated to two neighbor oxygens
and one ligand. After the ligand has been eliminated, the cn is
reduced by one.
In a case where the densiﬁed ZnX/Zn group is coordinated
only to a single oxygen site, a reverse densiﬁcation can occur.
In reverse densiﬁcation, a Zn or ZnX group returns to the
oxygen sublattice. After the reverse densiﬁcation, the group
may densify again and possibly end up on a site with a higher
cn. The ad hoc barrier for the reverse densiﬁcation is 0.60 eV.
Densiﬁcation is also deﬁned for oxygen species after water
adsorption on a zinc site (see sectionAdsorption of Water).
The adsorbed water can exchange protons with the
neighboring oxygen sites, so the densiﬁcation is deﬁned for
OH2, OH, and O species. The oxygen densiﬁcation is also an
event III process
i j i j
event IIIOH2ZnX
site
VAC
site
ZnX
site
OH2
site+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(14)
The densiﬁcation of water has an ad hoc barrier of 0.40 eV in
all cases.
Surface Reactions of MEZ. The ethyl-ligand of MEZ
groups can be eliminated from the zinc sublattice with protons
from hydroxyl groups or adsorbed water molecules. The
elimination of the ethyl-ligand produces bare zinc atoms on the
surface. In our recent DFT study on the surface kinetics of
DEZ/H2O ALD process,11 most of the reaction barriers found
for removing surface ethyl-ligands by water/hydroxyl groups
were above 1 eV. Barriers below this threshold were still larger
than those for the DEZ, and it is evident from our sample that
the elimination of the MEZ is the limiting factor of the process.
We have used the lowest barriers calculated in our DFT study
for each conﬁguration in the model because the lowest barriers
have largest impact on the dynamics of the process.
Two possible approaches could be taken to implement the
DFT calculations10,11 for the surface reactions by either using
the cn of the oxygen or the zinc site as the primary variable to
dictate the activation energy for this reaction. There is no clear
trend in the DFT activation energies11 as the cn of either
oxygen or MEZ is varied to suggest a clear distinction. We have
chosen to use the cn of the oxygen site as the deﬁning variable
in our implementation to better diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent
reaction mechanisms.
Using the state of the oxygen site as the main variable, we
can deﬁne ligand elimination reactions between OH and OH2
groups separately with diﬀerent cn’s. The ligand removal is
then treated as anevent III process
i j i j
event IIIOH2
site
ZnX
site
OH
site
Zn
site+⎯→ ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(15)
Again, the removal of ethane is assumed to be barrierless and
irreversible. Mechanisms considered for the model are
tabulated inTable 2.
Adsorption of Water. After the DEZ pulse reaches
saturation, a short purge period is used to remove all remaining
gaseous DEZ molecules as well as reaction by-products from
the surface. Because of the high reactivity of DEZ, there are
virtually no DEZ left on the surface after the purge in our
simulations, so no reactions involving DEZ and gaseous water
are considered in our model.
In the DFT calculations,11 water was found to adsorb mainly
to 2- or 3-coordinated zinc atoms and to MEZ groups
coordinated with two oxygens. Thus, water adsorption is
deﬁned in kMC to occur for zinc sites with cn’s 2 and 3 and
ZnX sites with cn 3 (cn = 2 for oxygens and 1 for ligand). In all
the water adsorption processes considered with DFT, the
water adsorbed exothermically to a surface MEZ group or bare
zinc atom.
In a similar fashion to the DEZ adsorption, the adsorption of
water is a type I event
i i
i i
event I
event I
Zn
site
OH2Zn
site
ZnX
site
OH2ZnX
site
⎯→⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
⎯→⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯
(16)
where sitei can have cn 2 or 3 for Zn and 3 for ZnX. The rate
of adsorption is calculated usingeq 10, similarly to the DEZ
Table 2. Mechanisms Used in the Model for the Removal of
Ethyl-Ligand of MEZa
site i site ji cn Ea/eV
OH2 ZnX 1 0.72
OH ZnX 1 1.15
OH ZnX 2 0.93
OH ZnX 3 1.22
aActivation energies used here are adopted from Weckman and
Laasonen (ref 11).
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27050


adsorption. A reverse reaction is deﬁned for water desorption
but water can also desorb directly from the oxygen sublattice
ii
event IOH2
site
VAC
site⎯→⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ (17)
Water desorption is treated similarly to DEZ desorption,
where the rate is given byeq 11. The adsorption energy of
water serves as a desorption barrier for water. Water has a wide
range of DFT adsorption energies11 that strongly correlate
with the cn of the adsorbed water molecule. We have chosen
the strongest adsorption bonds for any given cn. These
conﬁgurations are summarized inTable 3.
As the water adsorbs to a surface Zn or ZnX site, the
adsorbed water is 1-coordinated as only one Zn−O bond has
been formed. The adsorption energy to the Zn site with cn 2 or
3i s−1.03 eV and to ZnX site with cn 3, the adsorption energy
is −1.21 eV. If the ZnX becomes coordinated to three oxygens,
the adsorption bond is considerably weakened to−0.41 eV, as
there is no room for water to form a bond with the zinc atom.
For 4-coordinated Zn or 5-coordinated ZnX, the adsorption
energy is reduced to an artiﬁcial value of−0.10 eV, eﬀectively
instantaneously removing the water molecule from the Zn or
ZnX site. The water needs to be removed as all of the
neighboring oxygen sites are already occupied and it is not
possible for the water to densify onto the oxygen sublattice.
Because there is no room for water to form a strong bond
between a ZnX coordinated to three oxygens, we have added
an additional desorption process for water in the case when
OH2 is situated next to a highly coordinated ZnX. This
process is associated with the adsorption energy of−0.41 eV.
The process is described as
i j i j
event IIIZnX
site
OH2
site
ZnX
site
VAC
site+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(18)
when the cn of sitei is 5.
After the water molecule has densiﬁed onto the oxygen
sublattice, the adsorption energy of water is highly dependent
on the cn of the water molecule, ranging from−1.21 eV for 1-
coordinated OH2 to−2.32 eV for 3-coordinated OH2.
No mask-type function is deﬁned for the water pulse, so
there is no explicit steric repulsion between the water
molecules. However, we know from DFT calculations11 on
high ethyl-density surface that the adsorption energy of water
decreases when additional water molecules are introduced
onto the surface. The adsorption energy of theﬁrst water
molecule is strong, but the addition of more water molecules
decreases the average adsorption energy per water molecule
signiﬁcantly.
We have calculated the adsorption energies of several water
molecules on the ethyl-saturated surface (labeled case 1 surface
in refs10 and 11). The overall adsorption energy as well as the
average adsorption energy per water molecule as a function of
water molecules on the surface is illustrated inFigure 6. The
overall adsorption energy is deﬁned as the change in total
energy with respect to the ethyl saturated surface
EE N E E ()Nsurface H O H O surface22
Δ =− + + (19)
The average adsorption energy per water molecule is the
overall adsorption energy divided by the number of water
molecules on the surface.
Initially, the change in energy is negative (exothermic
reaction) as new water molecules are introduced into the
system. However, steric repulsion between the new water
molecules and surface ethyl-ligands decreases the average
adsorption energy. After three water molecules, addition of
new water molecules does not lead to a decrease in energy in
the system. The averaged adsorption energy for three water
molecules is−0.74 eV. To include the steric repulsion between
the surface species, we have chosen this adsorption energy as
the water adsorption energy on OH2ZnX and OH2Zn sites of
high ethyl-coverage. The adsorption energy of 1-coordinated
OH2 is also set to−0.74 eV, whereas the adsorption energies
of 2- and 3-coordinated water are decreased by 1.21− 0.74 =
0.47 eV at high ethyl-coverage.
After adsorption, the water molecule or a hydroxyl group
undergoes densiﬁcation process, whereby the OH2/OH group
jumps to the oxygen sublattice. This event is described as an
event IIIprocess (see alsoeq 14)
i j i j
event IIIOH2ZnX
site
VAC
site
ZnX
site
OH2
site+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(20)
Table 3. Desorption from Diﬀerent Conﬁgurationsa
site type cn Eads/eV
OH2Zn 3, 4 −1.03
OH2Zn 5 −0.10
OH2ZnX 4 −1.21
OH2ZnX 5 −0.41
OH2ZnX 6 −0.10
OH2 1 −1.21
OH2 2 −1.76
OH2 3 −2.32
aThe adsorption energies given for water serve as an desorption
barrier as written in eq 11. The site is the initial state for the
desorption event, and the cn is the coordination number of the site in
the event.
 Figure 6.Change in energy as a function of water molecules as well as
the averaged adsorption energy per adsorbed water molecule. At the
ethyl-coverage of 7.1 ethyl nm−2, the adsorption bond of a single
water molecule is strong. However, inclusion of more water molecules
weakens the average adsorption bond because of steric hindrance.
After three water molecules, no further water can adsorb to the
surface.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27051


with an arbitrary barrier of 0.40 eV. This event is described for
cn’s i = 3, 4, and 5 and can occur when the sitei is masked.
In the DFT calculations on the water pulse at the ethyl-
saturated surface, 11 no adsorption barrier for water was
observed at 0 K. However, at high ethyl-coverages, there
exists a dynamical barrier as the water molecule adsorbs to the
surface at high ethyl coverage because of the thermal
movement of the ethyl ligands. This means that the adsorption
is preferred to sites with lower ethyl-coverage. We therefore
use a low ad hoc barrier of 0.20 eV for the adsorption onto zinc
sites with high ethyl-concentration.
Proton Diﬀusion on the Surface.On the basis of the
DFT molecular dynamics trajectories,11 the dissociation of
water and proton diﬀusion between two oxygen atoms can
evidently occur with a relatively low barrier. For the proton
diﬀusion to occur in a short ab initio molecular dynamics
simulation, the barrier needs to be on the order of 0.1−0.2 eV.
However, considerably higher barriers of 0.5−0.6 and 0.75 eV
for proton diﬀusion have been reported in DFT studies using
NEB on Al2O3
23 and HfO2
24 surfaces, respectively.
The time evolution of the simulation depends on the overall
reaction rates which in turn depend exponentially on the
reaction barriers. A large fraction of the kMC simulation is
used for proton diﬀusion, and so the overall simulation time is
exponentially dependent on the proton diﬀusion barrier. For
the simulation time to be reasonable, it does not matter
whether the barrier for proton diﬀusion is 0.1 or 0.5 eV as the
barrier needs to be artiﬁcially increased.21 Therefore, a barrier
of 0.6 eV is set for most of the proton transfer reactions in the
temperature range 27−127 °C. Also, a small energetic“nudge”
is added so as to induce protons to prefer 1- and 2-coordinated
oxygens, and highly coordinated water prefers to dissociate.
For temperatures at 152 and 177°C, the proton diﬀusion
barriers were further increased by 0.08 and 0.11 eV,
respectively, in order to decrease the simulation time.
Several diﬀerent proton diﬀusion mechanisms are incorpo-
rated into the model. First, two hydroxyl groups can react to
form water and bare oxygen.
i k i k
event IIOH
site
OH
site
OH2
site
O
site
+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(21)
This process is deﬁned for all possible cn’s and has an ad hoc
barrier of 0.75 eV. Second, a bare oxygen can accept a proton
from a neighboring hydroxyl group or a water molecule.
i k i k
event IIO
site
OH2/OH
site
OH
site
OH/O
site
+⎯ → ⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯⎯ +
(22)
Diﬀusion of a proton to 1- or 2-coordinated oxygens has the ad
hoc barrier 0.6 eV. For 3-coordinated oxygen, this is increased
to 0.7 eV. The proton transfer to and from an oxygen group is
also deﬁned between oxygen sites containing zinc (such as
ZnX2OH and ZnXOH) and zinc sites containing oxygen (such
as OH2ZnX and OH2Zn) to allow for maximum mobility for
the protons.
■ RESULTS ON ZNO ALD
The kMC model is constructed on the basis of DFT
calculations. The proton diﬀusion and densiﬁcation processes
in the model are assigned ad hoc barriers. The kMC model is a
representation of a complex system, and if the relevant
processes have been captured in the DFT calculations, the
model should show adequate qualitative and quantitative
agreement with experiments. It can then be used to obtain new
insights.
In all of the simulations conducted, the initial conﬁguration
for the kMC is a planar ZnO(100) surface fully covered with
water depicted in Figure 7 a. Temperatures used in the
simulations range from 27 to 177 °C (300−450 K). The
default precursor gas pressure used is 20 Pa (150 mTorr).
Because of the low reaction barrier for DEZ on the surface,
the GPC is insensitive to the DEZ pulse length. DEZ
saturation is achieved already at 0.05 s pulse length, and the
GPC is not aﬀected by an increase in the pulse length.
However, because of the slow kinetics of the surface reactions,
the water pulse requires long exposure times. Further details
on the saturation with respect to pulse length are presented in
theSupporting Information. The pulse times used in the
simulations, unless expressed otherwise, are 0.70 s for the DEZ
pulse and 0.70 s for the H2O pulse. For the purges between the
reactant pulses, a 0.1 s purge time is used. The overall
simulation time is then 16 s, resulting in 10 full ALD cycles. In
the analysis of the data, theﬁrst two ALD cycles are discarded
so that the initial conﬁguration does not aﬀect the results.
Self-Limiting Growth.The initial state of our simulation is
a planar ZnO(100) surface hydroxylated with water molecules.
As an example of a prototypical simulation, top and side views
Figure 7.Illustration of the ZnO surface from above during the initial
ALD cycle at elevated temperature. The size of simulation box in this
ﬁgure is one-quarter of the simulation box used in the production
simulations. (a) Initial conﬁguration, water covered zinc oxide surface
and (b) surface after DEZ saturation. Surface is covered with MEZ.
The eﬀect of the mask function can be seen here, as the ethyl-ligands
tend to avoid one another when densifying to the zinc sublattice.
Some of the MEZ remain nondensiﬁed. (c) Surface shortly after the
beginning of the water pulse. Several ethyl-ligands have already been
eliminated. (d) Surface after the water pulse. Some MEZ remain on
the surface even after the water pulse, and these ligand fragments are
called persistent ligands.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27052


of the surface before and after DEZ and H 2O pulses are
illustrated in Figures 7 and 8, respectively.
The ALD reactions in the simulation result in a self-limiting
growth. The DEZ adsorption is strong, and the removal of the
ﬁrst ligand has a low barrier; therefore, the initial planar surface
is rapidly saturated with DEZ. The adsorption of DEZ is self-
limiting because the MEZ fragments on the surface block the
neighboring oxygen sites as the surface ethyl-density increases.
During the water pulse, water adsorbs to surface bare zinc
and MEZ sites. The adsorption of water ceases after each
accessible oxygen site closes to MEZ and bare zinc sites has
been occupied. Some of the water react with MEZ and
eliminate ethyl from the surface, some donate protons to
surface oxygens and dissociate.
Mass Increment.The kMC model can be used to extract
macroscopic quantities related to the thin-ﬁlm growth. These
growth characteristics can then be compared directly to
experimental data on the ALD of ZnO.
During the simulation, the mass change in the system can be
calculated directly from the molecular mass of each site on the
lattice as a function of time. This gives us data of the mass
change of the thinﬁlm with respect to time, comparable to a
quartz-crystal microbalance (QCM) measurement of theﬁlm
deposition. In Figure 9, the mass gain of the system as a
function of time at various temperatures is presented. The
diﬀerent ALD cycles can be identiﬁed as steps on the mass−
time graph.
The initial DEZ saturation is almost identical at all
temperatures for theﬁrst ALD cycle because the initial surface
is clean of ethyl-ligands and reactions for DEZ have a low
barrier. After theﬁrst cycle, however, there is a clear divergence
in the simulated QCM graphs depending on the deposition
temperature. At low temperatures, where the thin-ﬁlm
deposition is low, the graph ﬂattens out after the ﬁrst few
ALD cycles. At elevated temperatures, the mass gain is
identical from each ALD cycle to the next.
In Figure 10, the simulated mass change during a single ALD
cycle is presented alongside an experimental QCM data
adopted from ref25. The data are obtained by averaging over
the last 8 ALD cycles. Both the simulations and the experiment
were conducted at 177 °C. The graphs are in qualitative
agreement with each another. The main mass gain during the
ALD cycle comes from the DEZ pulse, and the mass−time
graph reaches a saturation. The simulated graph is stable
during the purge phases for both DEZ and H2O, but in the
experimental graph, there is a signi ﬁcant decrease in the
deposited mass for both reactants. This is likely due to weakly
bound precursors and by-products desorbing from the surface.
No such eﬀect is observed in the simulation because no weakly
bound species are present during the DEZ pulse and ethane
desorption is assumed to be instantaneous. Therefore, the
purge phases in the simulated cycle are short in comparison to
the experimental cycle as hardly anything of interest occurs in
the simulation during the purge phases.
At the beginning of the water pulse, the mass increases
slightly. This mass gain slowly decreases, reaching a steady
level. In the experiment, the mass decrease occurs during the
purge. In our simulation, although some water molecules form
only weak adsorption bonds, there is only slight decrease in the
mass during the purge. The net change in mass from the end of
the DEZ pulse to the end of the water pulse is very small in
both simulation and experiment.
Thickness Increment. The thickness increment per cycle
can be calculated from the mass−time curve in Figure 9 or
from the thickness of the simulated thinﬁlm. The average mass
deposited onto the surface area of theﬁlm per cycle is obtained
from the slope of the curve or equivalently from the net gain
per cycle inFigure 10. Dividing this average mass per area with
the density of the bulk ZnO (5.62 g cm−3), the GPC can be
calculated in the same fashion as done in an experimental
QCM measurement.26
The average GPC can also be obtained from the thickness
from the simulated thin ﬁlm by dividing the change in the
thickness with the number of ALD cycles. However, the height
of the simulatedﬁlm is not well deﬁned because theﬁlm does
not grow entirely uniformly, at least at low temperatures (see
sectionDefects in the Thin Film). We have measured the
change in the thickness of the thinﬁlm by deﬁning the“top” of
the thin ﬁlm as the layer in which 50% or more of the lattice
sites have been occupied. The GPC calculated this way was
found to be robust, and the same results were produced with
higher cutoﬀs of 60 and 80%. Theﬁrst two ALD cycles have
been removed from the data. The GPC with respect to
temperature from our simulations is presented inFigure 11
alongside experimental data by Yousﬁ et al.26
The two approaches taken for calculating the average GPC
of the simulated thinﬁlm are in agreement with each other.
Figure 8.Side view of the ZnO surface during the initial ALD cycle.
The labels (a−d) correspond to the same stages of the initial ALD
cycle as inFigure 7. The formation of the new atomic layer can be
clearly seen. After the water pulse, some ethyl-ligands remain on the
surface and are not eliminated within the ALD cycle.
 Figure 9. Simulated QCM data from the kMC model. Initially, the
growth rate is the same for all temperatures when the surface becomes
saturated with DEZ. However, after ethyl-saturation, the diﬀerent
temperature graphs diverge as the elimination of ethyl-ligands is low
at low temperatures.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27053


The ﬁlm growth is low at temperatures below 25 °C. At
temperatures above 25 °C, the ﬁlm growth of the simulated
ﬁlm increases and reaches a plateau at 100°C and remains
stable with respect to the temperature. This temperature range
is called the“ALD window ”. At maximum growth, the
simulated GPC deviates 18% from the experimental data.
The GPC reported by Yousﬁ et al.26 is somewhat larger than
that in other experimental publications where the thickness of
theﬁlm is calculated in some diﬀerent fashion. However, a
QCM measurement best relates to our simulation.
The onset of the thin- ﬁlm growth is o ﬀset from the
experimental data by roughly 45°C. This oﬀset is likely due to
the underestimation of the reaction barriers by DFT. The GPC
is very sensitive to the barriers for the second ligand
elimination reaction as can be seen fromFigure 12, where all
of the barriers for the second ligand elimination reaction have
been increased by 0.10 eV. The overall trend and slope of the
curve remain the same; however, the temperatures for the
onset and saturation of the growth shift by 40°C.
Persistent Ligands. At low temperatures, only little
growth of ZnO is observed. It is evident from our kMC
simulations that the limiting factor for the growth is the
elimination of the ethyl-ligands from the surface during the
water pulse. At low temperatures, water is unable to remove
many of the surface ethyl-ligands. The surface remains
crowded with MEZ that blocks the possible adsorption sites,
and further adsorption of DEZ is inhibited. At elevated
temperatures, the elimination of ethyl becomes accessible,
resulting in adsorption of DEZ onto the surface and the
familiar layer-by-layer growth.
The incomplete elimination of the ethyl-ligands leads to
persisting ligands on the surface. These ligands cannot be
eliminated from the system because of the large activation
energy. The fraction of the newly deposited ligands that persist
on the surface after each cycle can be calculated from the
simulation data. The fraction of persisting ligands,fethyl,i s
calculated as
f
N
Nethyl
ethyl,DEZ H O
ethyl,DEZ
2
=
Δ
Δ
+
(23)
Figure 10. Simulated mass change as a function of time from the kMC model (left) and the corresponding experimental QCM measurement
adopted from ref25 (right). The diﬀerent phases (DEZ pulse/purge/H2O pulse/purge) within the ALD cycle are indicated by the vertical dashed
lines. The ZnO thinﬁlms are deposited at temperature 177°C in both the simulation and the experiment.
Figure 11.Simulated GPC data, estimated from both the thickness of
the simulated thinﬁlm and from the deposited mass, compared to the
growth rate reported in ref26. The GPC estimated from the average
mass includes the error bars, obtained as a standard deviation from
series of simulations.
Figure 12. GPC as a function of temperature in the case where the
barriers for the second ligand elimination reaction (LE2) have been
increased by 0.10 eV. The elimination of the MEZ from the surface is
clearly the crucial step in the deposition process. Increasing the barrier
shifts the observed behavior to higher temperature as the ligand-
elimination reaction can occur only at elevated temperatures.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27054


where ΔNethyl,DEZ is the change in the number of ethyl ligands
during the DEZ pulse andΔNethyl,DEZ+H2O is the change in the
number of ethyl ligands over the whole cycle, DEZ and water
pulses. If the DEZ and water pulses last for 0.7 s and the
purging takes 0.1 s after each pulse, we can calculate the
change in the number of ethyl-ligands as
NN N
NN N
tt
tt
ethyl,DEZ ethyl, 0.8s ethyl, 0
ethyl,DEZ H O ethyl, 1.6s ethyl, 02
Δ= −
Δ= −
==
+= = (24)
The fraction ineq 23 then corresponds to the fraction of the
newly deposited ligands that remain on the surface at the end
of the cycle.
fethyl as a function of temperature is plotted inFigure 13
along side with available experimental data. The fraction of
persisting ligands is averaged over the last 8 ALD cycles. The
experimental data on the fraction of persisting ligands have
been made by measuring the diﬀerence FTIR spectra12 after a
DEZ/H2O cycle. The ZnO surface was prepared in the
experiments by cleaning it with H2O at 300 °C before the
measurement.
The simulation is in qualitative agreement with the limited
experimental data available. The removal of the MEZ is clearly
very sensitive to temperature. The incomplete elimination of
the ethyl-ligands is clearly the main reason for the poor GPC at
low temperatures as no further zinc can deposit onto the ethyl-
saturated surface. In our kMC model, the fraction of persisting
ligands reaches a limit of 40% ligands persisting after each ALD
cycle, whereas experimentally, it is observed that the fraction
decreases close to zero at elevated temperatures.
Defects in the Thin Film.In the kMC simulation, a large
fraction of ethyl-ligands persist on the surface even at elevated
temperatures. Because not all ligands are removed, theﬁlm
may grow around these ligands leaving them encapsulated into
the lattice. Two simulated thinﬁlms at the end of the
simulation are depicted inFigure 14. Most noticeably, theﬁlm
deposited at high temperature contains ethyl-ligands encapsu-
lated within the lattice.
The ethyl-ligands mask some of the neighboring sites, and
some of these blocked sites are left vacant. These lattice defects
correspond to impurities, vacancies, and lattice defects in the
actual thinﬁlm. The fraction of vacant lattice sites in theﬁlm at
the end of the simulation (10 ALD cycles) for various
temperatures is depicted inFigure 15 . The fraction of
vacancies is summed along thexy-plane of the thinﬁlm and
plotted as a function of theﬁlm thickness along thez-axis. The
extent to which the lattice was occupied along thez-axis was
used to calculate the growth rate from the ﬁlm thickness
previously.
The initial layer of hydroxylated surface atz = 0 is fully
occupied with zero vacant sites present. The vacuum above the
deposited surface is reached when the fraction of vacant sites
reaches unity. At low temperatures a large fraction of the lattice
sites remain vacant because of the poor growth. The fraction of
vacant sites inﬁlms deposited at 27 and 52 °C increases
drastically as a function of theﬁlm thickness. This indicates
that theﬁlms are nonuniform. In contrast, theﬁlms deposited
at 127 and 177°C show lower portions of vacancies. However,
Figure 13.Fraction of persisting ligands as a function of temperature
in the simulation. Experimental data, obtained from ref 12, are
measured for low and high water exposures. Low and high water
exposures correspond to 104 and 107 L, respectively.
Figure 14. Side proﬁle from the thinﬁlm deposited at temperatures
27 and 152°C. From the simulated trajectories, the amount of ethyl-
ligands persisting in theﬁlm is large even at high temperatures. This
creates defects into the ﬁlm as the ethyl-ligands mask some of the
neighboring sites and lead to impurities within the grownﬁlm. In
reality, the ethyl-ligands are not likely to stay as ethyl-ligands within
the substructure of the ﬁlm but convert to other by-products or
impurities.
Figure 15.Fraction of lattice site vacant at the end of the simulation
after 2 s of deposition (10 cycles). It is evident that theﬁlm growth is
slow at low temperature (blue) because the lattice sites are occupied
only up to a 9 Å thickness. At slightly higher temperatures, theﬁlm
grows faster but the depositedﬁlm contains many defects and has a
lower density of atoms than a bulk ZnO. The fraction of defects
decreases with increasing temperature.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27055


the fraction of vacant sites remains at about 20% and is
constant throughout theﬁlm.
The ligand incorporation as a function of theﬁlm depth is
depicted in Figure 16. The ﬁgure shows the fraction of the
lattice sites that contain an ethyl-ligand as a function of theﬁlm
thickness. Throughout the ﬁlm, 20−25% of the lattice sites
contain a ligand. The proportion of ligands peaks at the
beginning of the deposition. This peak is especially strong at
low temperatures. After the initial peak, the concentration of
ligands is stable throughout theﬁlm.
■ DISCUSSION
The simulated mass increment during an ALD cycle is in
qualitative agreement with the experimental data. The bulk of
the deposited mass is produced during the DEZ pulse. The
average mass deposited at 177°C is around 150 ng cm−2. The
mass change during the water pulse is negligible (−2.14 ng
cm−2) in our kMC model. The quantitative mass is
overestimated by our model by approximately 25%.
Elam and George25 deﬁne ν̃̃as the average number of
hydroxyl groups that reacted with each adsorbed DEZ
molecule within an ALD cycle. This is determined from the
ratio of mass changes occurring during the half-reactions as
measured by QCM. The ratio is calculated from the QCM data
by
M
M
MM
MM
(2 )B
A
HO CH
DEZ C H
22 6
26
ν
ν=
−− ∼
− ∼ (25)
where MA is the mass gain from the DEZ pulse andMB is the
mass gain from the water pulse andMi is the molecular mass of
molecule i. From our simulation at 177°C, the average mass
gain after the DEZ pulse (MA) is 155.81 ng cm−2 and after the
complete cycle 153.67 ng cm−2. Thus, in our simulation, there
is small negative mass change of−2.14 ng cm−2 after the water
pulse (MB). Using the above equation, we can determine the
average number of hydroxyl groups reacting per DEZ to beν̃=
1.36, in close agreement with the experimental value ofν̃̃=
1.37 reported by Elam and George.
The thickness increment of the thinﬁlm can be calculated
either from the height of the simulated thinﬁlm or from the
average mass gain during the deposition. The GPC is in
qualitative agreement with experimental data. Because of the
underestimation of the reaction barriers by DFT, the GPCs
temperature dependency is oﬀset from the experimental data
by roughly 40°C. It is evident from our simulations that the
low growth at the low temperatures (<50°C) is due to the
poor elimination of the ethyl ligands. Because of this, there is
no room for further DEZ to adsorb onto the surface. At
elevated temperatures, the ligand removal becomes feasible
and theﬁlm begins to grow, reaching a peak of approximately
2.6 Å at about 100°C and above. The quantitative deviation
from the experimental data at maximum growth is about 18%.
On contrary to the experimental data, we have not observed
any downturn in the GPC at elevated temperatures.
A simple sensitivity test shows that the removal of the MEZ
during the water pulse is the limiting step in the process.
Increasing this reaction barrier by 0.1 eV shifts the onset of the
thin-ﬁlm growth by roughly 40 °Ca n di m p r o v e st h e
correspondence between the simulated graph and the
experimental data. The large fraction of ethyl-ligands persisting
in theﬁlm increases the mass gain during the simulation. If the
ligands decompose and are removed from the system, the
maximum growth rate reduces from 2.6 to 2.3 Å per cycle.
Because of the high barrier for elimination of the ethyl-
ligand from the surface, a large portion of the ethyl ligands
persist after an ALD cycle. The extent of the persistent ligands
in theﬁlm is also in agreement with experimental data
available. Mackus et al.12 conducted an FTIR measurement of
the ALD of ZnO and compared the changes in the absorbance
to a background spectrum of the surface cleaned with long
water pulse at high temperature. At the usual deposition
exposures (on the order of 104 L), 57% of the ethyl-ligands
persisted on the surface at 150°C at the end of the H2O pulse.
This reduced to 16% at extended H2O exposure (6× 107 L).
We have calculated the fraction of ligands persisting after each
pulse as a function of temperature. The water exposure in our
simulation is approximately 150 mTorr× 0.70 s = 1× 105 L.
This fraction does not include the ethyl-ligands already present
in the surface/lattice but corresponds to the fraction of the
newly deposited ligands that remain on the surface at the end
of the cycle. The fraction declines as a function of temperature,
in rough agreement with the experimental data available.
Unlike the experimental data, the simulated curve plateaus to a
fraction of roughly 40% at 177°C, whereas the experimental
data go down to zero. This is because of the large barriers for
the elimination of the ligands in our model and because of the
restricted set of events available. Incorporation of the
cooperative water e ﬀects would be likely to improve this
comparison, as the stabilizing water−water interactions would
add mechanisms for ligand elimination.
Water molecules that are unable to react with the ethyl-
ligands remain adsorbed in some cases and are therefore
available for DEZ adsorption in the next cycle and slowly the
ﬁlm starts to grow around the unreactive MEZ sites. In reality,
it is unlikely that the ethyl-ligands would remain within the
sublayers of the growingﬁlm, but instead, the ligands are likely
to decompose or be removed through some as yet unknown
mechanism. This is supported by the low carbon content in the
deposited ZnOﬁlms.27 The elimination of the ligands may
occur, for example, by a transfer ofβ-hydride and desorption of
C2H4, leading to the incorporation of H into the ﬁlm.
However, DFT calculations 10,11 conducted on the planar
ZnO(100) surface on the pyrolysis or β-elimination of the
Figure 16. Fraction of lattice sites in theﬁlm that contain an ethyl-
ligand. The fraction of sites containing an ethyl-ligand peaks at the
beginning of the deposition. The peak then levels down to about 20 to
25% of sites containing an ethyl-ligand.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27056


ethyl-ligands have predicted very large activation energies for
these mechanisms. The removal of ethyl from the surface is
likely to require a more complex surface environment than the
planar structures we have used in our investigations so far.
We suggest that the ethyl-ligands produce impurities and
lattice vacancies in the structure of the growing ﬁlm.
Temperature has an important role in reducing these defects
by increasing the extent to which the ligands are eliminated.
The defects can be quantiﬁed by calculating the fraction of
vacant sites within the lattice. This fraction greatly decreases as
a function of temperature but only down to 20%.
■ CONCLUSIONS
The ALD of zinc oxide via DEZ/H 2O process has been
simulated using a three-dimensional (3D) on-lattice kMC
model. The deposition of the thinﬁlm is described as a
sequence of discrete reaction events. The activation energies
for the chemical reactions were obtained from DFT
calculations. The temperature dependence of the thin-ﬁlm
growth is in qualitative and quantitative agreement with the
experimental data.
At low temperatures, the growth of the thinﬁlm is hampered
by the persistence of ethyl-ligands. The elimination of the
surface ligands has a relatively high activation energy. As the
deposition temperature increases, the removal of the surface
ligands becomes feasible, leading to the deposition of theﬁlm.
The onset of theﬁlm growth predicted by the model is oﬀset
from the experimental data by 40 °Cb e c a u s eo ft h e
underestimation of the reaction barriers in DFT.
The persisting ethyl-ligands are likely to contribute to lattice
defects in theﬁlm. During the deposition of the zinc oxide thin
ﬁlm, a substantial amount of ethyl-ligands are incorporated
into the lattice structure of zinc oxide. The persistance of
ligands is likely to cause some defects and impurities to form in
theﬁlm. The carbon content of the deposited thinﬁlms is
known to be low, and thus, it is likely that the ligands
encapsulated into the depositedﬁlm are removed by a yet
unknown mechanism.
This work thus demonstrates the value of kMC simulations
for studying the mechanism of materials processing, uniquely
bridging the gap between individual reaction data from DFT,
and average growth characteristics from experiment. kMC is a
suitable tool for modeling the growth of theﬁlm as the
complex interplay of di ﬀerent mechanisms can be imple-
mented into the reaction network.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*S Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications websiteat DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909.
Description of the additional DFT calculations done for
the kinetic model as well as details on the convergence
of the model with respect to the proton diﬀusion barrier,
densiﬁcation, and the reactant pulse lengths (PDF)
Example input for the kMC system (PDF)
■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: timo.weckman@gmail.com.
ORCID
Timo Weckman: 0000-0001-8721-560X
Mahdi Shirazi: 0000-0002-2497-3013
Simon D. Elliott:0000-0001-5573-5694
Kari Laasonen: 0000-0002-4419-7824
Notes
The authors declare no competingﬁnancial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the Center for Scientiﬁc Computing for the
use of their computational resources. Funding by the Academy
of Finland (projects nos. 13140115 and 13258547), the
Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence in Computational
Nanoscience (project no. 9158041), and COST Action
MP1402HERALD is acknowledged.
■ REFERENCES
(1) Pinna, N.; Knez, M.Atomic Layer Deposition of Nanostructured
Materials; Wiley-VCH, 2012.
(2) Karpina, V. A.; Lazorenko, V. I.; Lashkarev, C. V.; Dobrowolski,
V. D.; Kopylova, L. I.; Baturin, V. A.; Pustovoytov, S. A.; Karpenko, A.
J.; Eremin, S. A.; Lytvyn, P. M.; et al. Zinc oxideanalogue of GaN
with new perspective possibilities.Cryst. Res. Technol.2004, 39, 980−
992.
(3) Morkoc, H.; Özgür, Ü. Zinc Oxide: Fundamentals, Materials and
Device Technology; John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
(4) Moezzi, A.; McDonagh, A. M.; Cortie, M. B. Zinc Oxide
particles: Synthesis, Properties and Applications.Chem. Eng. J.2012,
185,1 −22.
(5) Deminsky, M.; Knizhnik, A.; Belov, I.; Umanskii, S.; Rykova, E.;
Bagatur’yants, A.; Potapkin, B.; Stoker, M.; Korkin, A. Mechanism and
Kinetics of Thin Zirconium and Hafnium Oxide Film Growth in an
ALD Reactor. Surf. Sci. 2004, 549,6 7−86.
(6) Mazaleyrat, G.; Estève, A.; Jeloaica, L.; Djafari-Rouhani, M. A
Methodology for the Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulation of Alumina
Atomic Layer Deposition onto Silicon.Comput. Mater. Sci.2005, 33,
74−82.
(7) Dkhissi, A.; Estève, A.; Mastail, C.; Olivier, S.; Mazaleyrat, G.;
Jeloaica, L.; Djafari Rouhani, M. Multiscale Modeling of the Atomic
Layer Deposition of HfO2Thin Film Grown on Silicon: How to Deal
with a Kinetic Monte Carlo Procedure.J. Chem. Theory Comput.2008,
4, 1915−1927.
(8) Dkhissi, A.; Mazaleyrat, G.; Este ̀ve, A.; Rouhani, M. D.
Nucleation and Growth of Atomic Layer Deposition of HfO2Gate
Dielectric Layers on Silicon Oxide: A Multiscale Modelling
Investigation.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.2009, 11, 3701−3709.
(9) Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S. D. Atomistic Kinetic Monte Carlo Study of
Atomic Layer Deposition Derived from Density Functional Theory.J.
Comput. Chem. 2014, 35, 244−259.
(10) Weckman, T.; Laasonen, K. Atomic Layer Deposition of Zinc
Oxide: Diethyl Zinc Reactions and Surface Saturation from First-
Principles. J. Phys. Chem. C2016, 120, 21460−21471.
(11) Weckman, T.; Laasonen, K. Atomic Layer Deposition of Zinc
Oxide: Study on the Water Pulse Reactions from First-Principles.J.
Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 7685−7694.
(12) Mackus, A. J. M.; MacIsaac, C.; Kim, W.-H.; Bent, S. F.
Incomplete Elimination of Precursor Ligands During Atomic Layer
Deposition of Zinc-Oxide, Tin-Oxide, and Zinc-Tin-Oxide.J. Chem.
Phys. 2017, 146, 052802.
(13) Vandalon, V.; Kessels, W. M. M. What is Limiting Low-
temperature Atomic Layer Deposition of Al2O3? A Vibrational Sum-
frequency Generation Study.Appl. Phys. Lett.2016, 108, 011607.
(14) Vandalon, V.; Kessels, W. M. M. Revisiting the Growth
Mechanism of Atomic Layer Deposition of Al2O3: A Vibrational Sum-
frequency Generation Study.J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A2017, 35, 05C313.
(15) Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S. D. Cooperation Between Adsorbates
Accounts for the Activation of Atomic Layer Deposition Reactions.
Nanoscale 2015, 7, 6311−6318.
(16) Ferguson, J. D.; Weimer, A. W.; George, S. M. Surface
Chemistry and Infrared Absorbance Changes During ZnO Atomic
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27057


Layer Deposition on ZrO2 and BaTiO3 Particles.J. Vac. Sci. Technol.,
A 2005, 23, 118−125.
(17) Sandia National Laboratories. Stochastic Parallel PARticle
Kinetic Simulator (SPPARKS) Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulator.
http://spparks.sandia.gov/, 2018; online (accessed April 24, 2018).
(18) Plimpton, S.; Battaile, C.; Chandross, M.; Holm, L.;
Thompson, A.; Tikare, V.; Wagner, G.; Webb, E.; Zhou, X.;
Cardona, C. G.; et al. Crossing the Mesoscale No-mans Land via
Parallel Kinetic Monte Carlo.Sandia Report SAND2009-6226, 2009.
(19) Bortz, A. B.; Kalos, M. H.; Lebowitz, J. L. A New Algorithm for
Monte Carlo Simulation of Ising Spin Systems.J. Comput. Phys.1975,
17,1 0−18.
(20) Laidler, K. J.Chemical Kinetics; Harper & Row, 1987.
(21) Voter, A. F.Radiation Eﬀects in Solids; Springer, 2007; pp 1−23.
(22) Campbell, C. T.; Sellers, J. R. V. The Entropies of Adsorbed
Molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc.2012, 134, 18109−18115.
(23) Weckman, T.; Laasonen, K. First Principles Study of the
Atomic Layer Deposition of Alumina by TMA−H2O-process. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys.2015, 17, 17322−17334.
(24) Shirazi, M.; Elliott, S. D. Multiple Proton Diffusion and Film
Densification in Atomic Layer Deposition Modeled by Density
Functional Theory. Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 878−889.
(25) Elam, J. W.; George, S. M. Growth of ZnO/Al2O3 Alloy Films
Using Atomic Layer Deposition Techniques.Chem. Mater. 2003, 15,
1020−1028.
(26) Yousfi, E. B.; Fouache, J.; Lincot, D. Study of Atomic Layer
Epitaxy of Zinc Oxide by in-situ Quartz Crystal Microgravimetry.
Appl. Surf. Sci.2000, 153, 223−234.
(27) Jeon, S.; Bang, S.; Lee, S.; Kwon, S.; Jeong, W.; Jeon, H.;
Chang, H. J.; Park, H.-H. Structural and Electrical Properties of ZnO
Thin Films Deposited by Atomic Layer Deposition at Low
Temperatures. J. Electrochem. Soc.2008, 155, H738−H743.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C Article
DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b06909
J. Phys. Chem. C2018, 122, 27044−27058
27058
