Introducing densiﬁcation mechanisms into the modelling of HfO2 atomic
layer deposition
C. Mastaila,b,c,⁎, C. Lanthonya,b, S. Oliviera,b, J.-M. Ducéréa,b, G. Landaa,b, A. Estèvea,b,
M. Djafari Rouhania,b, N. Richardc, A. Dkhissia,b,d
a CNRS, LAAS, 7 avenue du Colonel Roche, F-31077 Toulouse, France
b Université de Toulouse, UPS, INSA, INP, ISAE, LAAS; F-31077 Toulouse, France
c CEA, DAM, DIF, F-91680 Arpajon, France
d LCT, Gent University Faculty of Engineering, Krijgslaan 281 S5-9000 Gent, Belgium
abstractarticle info
Available online 29 October 2011
Keywords:
Kinetic Monte Carlo simulation
DFT
Densiﬁcation
High-k
HfO2
ALD
Multi-scale simulation
Process simulation
Density functional theory calculations are used to highlight some basics of the densiﬁcation mechanisms arising
during atomic layer deposition of HfO2 onto silicon dioxide. The obtained results are discussed at the light of a
multi-model approach that enables process simulation at the atomic scale via Kinetic Monte Carlo simulations.
The impact of the proposed densiﬁcation mechanisms on the growth is demonstrated. We show that a complete
coverage is possible thanks to these mechanisms at a slow rate after that all surface reactive sites (OH sites) have
been consumed by precursor molecules.
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, chemical vapor deposition processes are well-established
techniques in which Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) is found to be
suitable for the slow and controlled growth of ultrathin, conformal
ﬁlms for the microelectronics industry [1,2]. Leaving the detailed
processing conditions aside, a general but fundamental question that
arises during growth is the necessary phase transition of the interesting
materials from their molecular structure in the gas phase to their solid
state structure in the depositedﬁlm. This is particularly true for metallic
compounds such as metallic oxides. Indeed, in these cases, the metal
has a covalent bonding structure, with a small coordination number
when considered as a precursor in the gas phase, while at in its end
deposited ionic structure, it exhibits a large coordination number.
The origin of theseﬁndings, which has been referred to as densiﬁcation
in the study by Dkhissi et al.[3] lies in the above structural phase
transition. The case of HfO2 layers, intended to be used in theﬁrst
generation of high-k-based gate oxides in the future generation of
MOS (Metal Oxide Semiconductor) transistors, constitutes a relevant
example. It is worth noting that while an abundant literature is dedicated
to precursor/surface physico-chemistry, particularly in the frame of
ALD deposition techniques [4–12], the detailed understanding of
the densiﬁcation mechanisms remains elusive and poorly treated
[13]. The present paper aims at giving insight into the densiﬁcation
processes based on gas phase DFT calculations. The ALD process
consists in trying to atomically control the growth by separating each
of its steps. Theﬁlm growth proceeds through self-terminating reactions
on surfaces. The ALD process can be separated into two half-reactions;
the ﬁrst half-cycle reaction concerns the precursor gas exposure and
the second half cycle is the oxidant precursor exposure. In the case of
the ALD of HfO2, the precursor molecules considered in the present
study are HfCl4 and water molecules respectively for the metallic
and oxidant precursors. As compared to CVD, this technique prevents
from gas phase reaction/densiﬁcation since there is no contact between
water and precursor molecules. So the densiﬁcation is expected only in
the speciﬁc context of each ALD cycle. Each exposure phase is separated
by a purge phase using an inert gas to remove the remaining unreacted
precursor molecules and unwanted reaction products. Actually, it has
been experimentally observed that under usual ALD growth conditions,
approximately ten cycles are needed to obtain the complete coverage of
the initial substrate, suggesting a partial monolayer growth per cycle.
Moreover, the density and the coordination number of the deposited
o x i d en e a rt h es u b s t r a t es u r f a c ea r em u c hl o w e rt h a nt h o s ei nt h eb u l k
oxide, but increase with increasing theﬁlm thickness. In more general
terms, growth of such an oxide on silicon is still not well understood
for two main reasons: ALD growth is associated with complex physico-
chemical mechanisms and it is strongly dependent on the deposition
procedure, temperature conditions or preparation conditions of the
substrate. In principle, a multiscale modelling strategy can provide
Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 4559–4563
⁎ Corresponding author at: CNRS, LAAS, 7 avenue du Colonel Roche, F-31077 Toulouse,
France. Tel.: +33 5 61 33 62 47.
E-mail address:cmastail@laas.fr (C. Mastail).
0040-6090/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.tsf.2011.10.125
Contents lists available atSciVerse ScienceDirect
Thin Solid Films
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/tsf

the necessary link for answering questions associating local physico-
chemical investigations and the deposition process. In this spirit, we
have recently developed an approach combining DFT calculations
for depicting local physico-chemical mechanisms, with a kinetic
Monte-Carlo algorithm to simulate at the mesoscale the ALD experi-
mental process of the growth of HfO2 on silicon. To date, DFT inves-
tigations have been limited to simple precursor decomposition onto
surfaces without any speciﬁc consideration of densiﬁcation mechanisms.
An empirical attempt to introduce such mechanisms have been pro-
posed leading to some bottlenecks[14], notably in predicting the
coordination increase during growth and the coverage versus ALD
deposition cycles (resulting in a saturation of the coverage limited
to 73% and the crystallinity limited to 62% after 10 ALD cycles). In
the following, we perform gas phase DFT calculations to open a pre-
liminary window into densiﬁcation mechanisms. From these results,
densiﬁcation mechanisms are implemented, discussed at the KMC
level and their impact is evaluated on the coverage versus ALD cycles
results. We demonstrate that densiﬁcation mechanisms allow to
predict basic experimental observations.
2. Computational details
All the calculations are performed using the Gaussian03 package
[15] within the frame of the density functional theory, using the gradient
corrected PBE functional[16]. Oxygen, hydrogen and silicon are de-
scribed with the triple zeta augmented with a polarization function,
respectively d and p, TZVP basis set[17].H a f n i u m[ K r ] ,4 d 1 0 , 4 f 1 4
core is replaced with a pseudo-potential[18] and valence electrons
were described with a (8s, 7p, 6d)/[6s, 5p, 3d] basis set[19].A l lt h e
stationary points are checked to be real minima thanks to the deter-
mination of the vibration frequencies; this allows us to correct the
binding energies of the zero point vibrational energy. Finally, the Basis
Set Superposition Error (BSSE) is corrected by the Boys and Bernardi
counterpoise scheme [20]. All Kinetic Monte Carlo calculations are
performed with the HIKAD code developed in our team[3,21].B a s i c
KMC simulations here presented are performed on 20×20 atoms for
the substrate modelling with periodic boundary conditions in order to
mimic an inﬁnite substrate.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. DFT investigation
In order to get further insights into the densiﬁcation mechanisms,
we propose a preliminary approach in which surface densiﬁcation
mechanisms are extrapolated from gas phase reactions. The idea is
to extract the local chemical part of these mechanisms from their
intrinsic collective behavior. Such an approximation has already
been proposed and validated for more conventional mechanisms
of the ALD. Hydroxylated metal M(OH)x has been used to study the
chemical reactions within deposition of metal oxide and the energetic
oscillations induced by the size effect. For the deposition of Al(CH3)3
on Al(OH) site, an oscillation of around ~0.1 eV with the cluster size
has been observed by Widjaja[23] and Heyman [24].I na d d i t i o n ,
many studies for the deposition of molecules on silicon oxide have
examined the size effect of the cluster and showed that oscillations
are negligible[25–28].
In this frame, M(OH)3–OH cluster is seen as a surface model after
hydrolysis. Two reacting species are considered on this model surface:
HfCl4 and Hf(OH)4. These two systems allow us to address densiﬁcation
in each ALD cycle, respectively during precursor and oxidant exposures.
The energy diagrams along the reaction path are presented inFig. 1.
Nevertheless, once validated through the complete multi-scale meth-
odology, a more precise view of these mechanisms will be reassessed
using more advanced DFT calculations. In this spirit, we have studied
for a future publication, the adsorption mechanism of HfCl4 on HfOH
substrate by using a bigger cluster (Si9O6H12Hf(OH)2). These initial cal-
culations conﬁrm an oscillation for the adsorption energy of 0.1 eV (cal-
culations not shown). We can then, consider M(OH)3–OH acceptable in
a ﬁrst approximation.
First of all, we consider a typical precursor surface interaction
through HfCl4/Hf(OH)4 as pictured inFig. 1a. The initial deposition
step is endothermic and leads to the formation of a strand or tree like
complex on the surface (see black curve) as already known from the lit-
erature. Then, densifying this complex can be operated in two different
ways. The red curve indicates an exothermic path in which a Cl atom is
exchanged between the precursor molecule and the model surface. This
almost barrierless exothermic path can be seen as a source for Chlorine
contamination of the substrate. However, the endothermic path indi-
cated in blue where a hydroxyl group of the surface can be bonded to
the precursor leading to a double bridging oxygen of the deposited
Hafnium atom. This process is characterized by two activation barriers
(0.24 and 0.99 eV) to arrive at the de-hydrogenation of the bridging
oxygen.
Along the same line, we now investigate the interaction of Hf(OH)4
(Fig. 1b). Our calculation that demonstrates a barrierless pathways is
responsible for a spontaneous dimerization (b0.05 eV activation)
giving rise to two bridging oxygen atoms having both one hydrogen
atom. This process is exothermic (−1.07 eV), similarly to the case of
the dimerisation reaction of HfCl4 and Hf(OH)4 (−1.01 eV). In these
two dimerization cases, we observe 2 ligands bridging the 2Hf atoms
leading to pentacoordinated metal centers. This can be viewed as a
ﬁrst step toward the cubic HfO2 crystalline structure since the same
symmetries can be found in crystalline oxide as previously deﬁned
as a densiﬁcation process [22]. This observation is of technological
Fig. 1.Precursor dimerization, including H transfer from OH bridges. Black curve is 1st
H transfer, blue curve is 2nd H transfer with HCl physisorbed and red curve is 2nd H
transfer without HCl physisorbed. Hf is yellow balls, Chlorine green balls, oxygen red
balls and hydrogen white balls.
4560 C. Mastail et al. / Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 4559–4563

importance as it demonstrates that a proper ALD process can severely
be altered by CVD like reactions in case of a hydroxylated precursors
(emanating from gas traces of impure precursors, or through exchange
processes of pure precursors in contact to the surface); the deposition of
clusters will then compete with precursor deposition.
A second step to go towards a more crystal-like structure and to
complete densiﬁcation is to take out H from the bridges of the dimers.
Fig. 1shows its chemical pathway andTable 1resumes energy gain
and barriers. For both dimerization reactions, theﬁrst H transfer is
followed by two mechanisms in competition. Theﬁrst is desorption
of the hydrogenate molecule formed. The second is the direct 2nd
deprotonation whereas the hydrogenate molecule formed is still
physisorbed. We see that deprotonation reactions are endothermic,
subject to backreactions, in the limit of the hydrogenated product
desorption. But the overall energy of this two molecule formation
is in the same order as intermolecular reactions. Therefore, at the
processing temperature, H migrations will occur and appear to move
freely at the cluster surfaces, jumping from O bridging sites, to OH
groups, and vice versa.
3.2. KMC investigation
In order to investigate the ALD process, two densiﬁcation reactions
suggested by the previous DFT study have been implemented into the
KMC simulation in addition to the mechanisms resulting from the sim-
ple decomposition of the precursors on the surface. A third densiﬁcation
mechanism is also considered that is extrapolated from the literature.
These densiﬁcation mechanisms are shown to impact drastically the
growth evolution.
The ﬁrst densiﬁcation mechanism considered in our KMC study
occurs when one strand Hf(OH)3 makes a 2nd oxygen bridge with a
neighboring Si-OH leading to a Hf in a crystalline position doubly
bonded to the substrate with two oxygen atoms. These two oxygen
atoms and the two ligands form a tetrahedral structure. This reaction
is called nucleation and expressed in Eq.(1).
jjSi\O\HfL3 þj jSi\O\H→Si\O\HfL2\O\Si þ H2O: ð1Þ
Even if this mechanism is predicted by Willis et al.[8] a complete
ab initio investigation of this mechanism, including activation energy
determination, is still lacking. For the closely related ZrCl 4(g)
chemistry on a SiO2 substrate, the activation energies of the nucle-
ation mechanism for Zr calculated by Han[9] will be taken asﬁrst
approximation for Hf nucleation mechanism. From the above DFT
investigation, we deﬁne a second densiﬁcation mechanism which
we named “inter-site” reaction. It expresses the possibility of having
two dissociated precursor molecules on two SiOH neighboring sites
dimerized. For this reaction, we consider one of the four hydroxyl func-
tions as a sufﬁcient approximation of the substrate. We then obtain two
vicinal strands Hf(OH)3 linked to the substrate via one oxygen atom.
The activation barrier considered to drive the kinetics of this reac-
tion is the addition of the two activations calculated at the DFT
level (seeFig. 1ba n dTable 1, ﬁrst and second H transfer, respectively
0 . 6 2a n d0 . 3 8e V :1e V ) .T h er e s u l t i n gd e n s iﬁcation is expressed here
Eq. (2).
2jjSiO2\O\HfL2OH→jjSiO2\O\HfL\O2\HfL\O\O2Sijj þ2HL:
ð2Þ
The third densiﬁcation reaction, called“on site” reaction, comes if
we consider one Hf(OH)3 as aﬁrst Hf deposited layer and the second
as an on top dissociated precursor (i.e. in the second layer). The silicon
substrate is in this case reduced to two hydroxyl functions.
jjSiO2\O\HfOHL\O\HfL3→jjSiO2\O\HfL\O2\HfL2 þ 2HL ð3Þ
where L represents Cl or OH terminal ligands. The relative activation of
this process corresponds to the addition of the two activations calculated
at the DFT level, 0.24+0.99 eV=1.23 eV (seeFig. 1aa n dTable 1). The
KMC conﬁguration of these three densiﬁcation reactions is shown in
Fig. 2.
Concerning the Kinetic Monte Carlo, the basic ingredients needed
to develop a lattice-based KMC model are as follows: (i) weﬁrst deﬁne a
lattice framework able to operate the desired transition between the
silicon crystal and the oxide structure, (ii) we then characterize each
conﬁguration by associating to each lattice site, the chemical nature
of the species occupying this site, (iii) we introduce the concept of
events that must describe correctly the chemistry of the basic mech-
anisms (seeTable 2), (iv) weﬁnally indicate how to deal with the time
Table 1
Energy difference and activation barrier ofﬁrst and second H transfers from a bridge
forming HCl and H2O ligand.
ΔE (eV) Barrier (eV)
Hf(OH)4 Hf Cl4 dimerization −1.01 /
1st H transfer +0.70 +0.78
2nd Chlorine transfer with HCl−1.22 +0.06
2nd H transfer without HCl +0.21/+0.99 +0.24/+0.99
2 Hf(OH)4 dimerization −1.07 /
1st H transfer +0.31 +0.62
2nd H transfer with H2O +0.32 +0.38
2nd H transfer without H2O +0.48 +0.53
a)
c)
b)
Fig. 2.The KMC conﬁguration of the three densiﬁcation reactions implemented in the KMC simulator. a) Nucleation, b) inter-site, and c) on-site mechanisms.
4561C. Mastail et al. / Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 4559–4563

evolution, namely, the temporal dynamics of the KMC. By implementing
all previous gas surface mechanisms obtained in our DFT calculations,
l i t e r a t u r ea n dt h e s et w od e n s iﬁcation reactions, we performedﬁlm
growth simulations on (20 ×20) atoms substrates. All KMC details, gas
surface mechanisms, and hydrolysis mechanisms, are published in our
papers [3]. The list of all the implemented mechanisms is summarized
in the following table. We simulate the growth during 10 ALD cycles,
under standard conditions: at 300 °C and 1.33 mbar pressure for the
two precursors. The small size of the substrate does not constitute a lim-
itation in these simulations, where atomic migrations in the growing
layer are not taken into account. The injection phases last 50 ms. for
metal precursor molecules, and 100 ms for water, as in experiments,
and are each followed by 3.5 s of purge.
Fig. 3represents the coverage of the substrate surface during the
ﬁrst ten deposition cycles. Results of simulations with and without
densiﬁcation mechanisms are compared with experimental observa-
tions take in same conditions.Fig. 1c l e a r l ys h o w st h er o l eo fd e n s iﬁca-
tion during the growth of HfO2. It is the only condition that allows an
agreement with experiments. The importance of this result is related to
the experimental observation that ten ALD cycles are necessary in
order to reach the full coverage of the silicon substrate (LEIS measure-
ments). After theﬁrst ten ALD cycles, growth proceeds via homoepitaxial
HfO2/HfO2 deposition only.
Besides, several modes of growth are successively observed ex-
perimentally. After aﬁrst cycle, consuming a great number of metal
precursors, a slow transient state is established to complete the cov-
erage of the substrate. Theﬁrst cycle behavior is well reproduced
with our simulations, whether densiﬁcation mechanisms are taken
into account or not. Indeed, after theﬁrst cycle, without and with
densiﬁcation, our simulations predict the same coverage because in
the end of this cycle the growth is essentially governed by precursor
adsorption and decomposition reactions as resumed inTable 2.A t
the end of thisﬁrst cycle, only 35% of the substrate is covered by HfO2.
According to our simulations, the deposited layer mainly consists in a
grid of nuclei consuming all the initial reactive SiOH groups. Theﬁrst
cycle coverage is then directly related to the hydroxyl function of
the silicon surface and then the substrate preparation method.
After thisﬁrst cycle, the growth continues on top of theﬁrst deposited
layer, ﬁlling up the successive layers. But this mode of growth does not
contribute to the coverage of the initial substrate due to the lack of reac-
tive sites on the silicon substrate. The coverage will though continue to
increase slowly thanks to theﬁrst deposited layer as a result of on-site
densiﬁcations. The experimental observation of a slowing down of the
coverage rate is explained, by our simulations, as a transition from the
nucleation to the densiﬁcation mechanism. The inter-site densiﬁcation
mechanisms, little by little, authorize bridging of the non reactive
surface zones. This is clearly seen inFig. 3where the simulation taking
densiﬁcation mechanisms into account follows perfectly the experi-
mental results. On the other hand, the coverage remains constant in
simulations which do not take densiﬁcation mechanisms into account
and where tree lie structures are observed.
4. Conclusion
We present a multi-scale study making it possible to simulate the
ALD of Hafnia onto SiO2 substrates. An attempt to calculate densiﬁcation
mechanisms is established and preliminary gas phase calculations allow
determining densiﬁcation activation barriers. The introduction of these
densiﬁcation mechanisms and associated calculated barriers is shown
to reproduce well experimental results on the coverage versus ALD de-
position cycles. Theﬁrst two regimes of growth are observed: the initial
regime at theﬁrst cycle, driven by the reactions of precursor adsorption
and further decomposition on the silicon substrate and the transitional
regime, which thanks to the action of densiﬁcation mechanisms leads to
full coverage of the substrate once all adhesion sites of the silicon sur-
face are consumed.
Acknowledgments
We thank A.N.R.-05-CIGC-0003-02 LN3M for the funding and
Groupement Scientiﬁq u eC A L M I Pa n dI D R I Sf o rt h ec o m p u t a t i o n a l
resources. We thank the Conseil Regional de Martinique for their
help.
References
[1] M. Leskela, M. Ritala, Thin Solid Films 409 (2002) 138.
[2] G.D. Wilk, R.M. Wallace, J.M. Anthony, J. Appl. Phys. 89 (2001) 5243.
[3] A. Dkhissi, A. Esteve, C. Mastail, S. Olivier, G. Mazaleyrat, L. Jeloaica, M. Djafari
Rouhani, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 4 (2008) 1915.
[4] Y. Widjaja, C.B. Musgrave, J. Chem. Phys. 117 (2002) 1931.
[5] J. Aarik, A. Aidla, V. Sammelselg, H. Siimon, T. Uustare, J. Cryst. Growth 169 (1996)
496.
[6] R.L. Puurunen, Chem. Vap. Deposition 11 (2005) 79.
[7] A.B. Mukhopadhyay, C.B. Musgrave, Chem. Phys. Lett. 421 (2006) 215.
[8] B.G. Willis, A. Mathew, L.S. Wielunski, R.L. Opila, J. Phys. Chem. C 112 (2008)
1994.
[9] J.H. Han, G. Gao, Y. Widjaja, E. Garfunkel, C.B. Musgrave, Surf. Sci. 550 (2004)
199.
[10] L. Jeloaica, A. Estève, M. Djafari Rouhani, D. Estève, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83 (2003)
542.
[11] A. Estève, M. Djafari Rouhani, L. Jeloaica, D. Estève, E-MRS 2002 Spring Meeting,
Strasbourg, France, Jun 18 21, Comp Mat Sci., 27, 2003, p. 75.
[12] G. Mazaleyrat, A. Estève, L. Jeloaica, M. Djafari Rouhani, Comput. Mater. Sci. 33
(2005) 74.
[13] A. Estève, L. Jeloaica, G. Mazaleyrat, A. Dkhissi, M. Djafari Rouhani, A. Ali Messaoud, N.
Fazouan, in: C.R. Albernathy, E.P. Gusev, D. Schlom, S. Stemmer (Eds.), December 01
04, 2003 Boston MA USA, Fundamentals of Novel Oxide/Semiconductor Interfaces
Proceedings 786, 2004, p. 35.
[14] A. Dkhissi, G. Mazaleyrat, A. Estève, M. Djafari Rouhani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
11 (2009) 3701.
[15] Gaussian 03, Revision B.05, Gaussian, Inc, Pittsburgh PA, 2003.
Table 2
list of mechanisms implemented in the KMC software HIKAD. The new mechanisms
implemented are in bold and those already implemented in theﬁrst version of the soft-
ware are in italics. * indicates activation energy extrapolated from Zr calculations.
Elementary mechanisms Activation energy
On SiOH On HfOH
HfCl4 chemisorption: 1st H transfer 0.88 eV 0.78 eV
Chemisorption back reaction of HCl in HfCl3 0.62 eV 0.08 eV
HfCl4 desorption 0.48 eV 1e V
HCl desorption 0.12 eV 0.05 eV
Cl ligand hydrolysis 0.916 eV
H2O desorption 0.619 eV
*Nucleation 0.7 eV
Inter-site densiﬁcation mechanism 1e V
On-site densiﬁcation mechanism 1.2 eV
Fig. 3.Coverage of the substrate surface during theﬁrst 10 ALD cycles. Simulations with
and without densiﬁcation mechanisms are compared to experimental results. The
starting surface used was a chemical SiO2 oxide surface prepared with DDC3 method
of SMS machine (representing an experimental OH surface density of 50%). The ALD
reactor used was Pulsar™ 2000.
4562 C. Mastail et al. / Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 4559–4563

[16] J.P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996) 3865.
[17] A. Schäfer, C. Huber, R. Ahlrichs, J. Chem. Phys. 100 (1994) 5829.
[18] D. Andrae, U. Haeussermann, M. Dolg, H. Stoll, H. Preuss, Theor. Chim. Acta 77
(1990) 123.
[19] F. Weigend, R. Ahlrichs, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 7 (2005) 3297.
[20] S.F. Boys, F. Bernardi, Mol. Phys. 19 (1970) 553.
[21] L. Jeloaica, A. Estève, A. Dkhissi, D. Estève, M. Djafari Rouhani, Comput. Mater. Sci.
33 (2005) 59.
[22] S. Olivier, J.M. Ducéré, C. Mastail, G. Landa, A. Estève, M. Djafari Rouhani, Chem.
Mat. 20 (2008) 1555.
[23] Y. Widjaja, C.B. Musgrave, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 (2002) 18.
[24] A. Heyman, C.B. Musgrave, J. Phys. Chem. B 108 (2004) 18.
[25] A.B. Mukhopadhyay, C.B. Musgrave, Chem. Phys. Lett. 421 (2006) 215.
[26] Z. Hu, C. Heath Turner, J. Phys. Chem. B 110 (2006) 16.
[27] J.H. Han, G. Gao, Y. Widjaja, E. Garfunkel, C.B. Musgrave, Surf Sci. 550 (2004)
199.
[28] A. Dkhissi, A. Esteve, L. Jeloaica, M. Djafari Rouhani, G. Landa, Chem. Phys. 323
(2006) 179.
4563C. Mastail et al. / Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 4559–4563