PurgePrecursor 
dosing
Purge
co-reactant
precursor
reaction
products
reaction
products
Co-reactant
exposure
1st Half-cycle 2nd Half-cycle
  
Atomic Layer Deposition Process Development 
10 steps to successfully develop, optimize and characterize ALD recipes 
Atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a surface-controlled thin ﬁlm deposition technique that can enable 
ultimate control over the ﬁlm thickness, uniformity on large-area substrates and conformality on 3D 
(nano)structures.1–5 Each ALD cycle consists at least two half-cycles (but can be more complex), 
containing a precursor dose step and a co-reactant exposure step, separated by purge or pump steps 
(see Figure 1). Ideally the same amount of material is deposited in each cycle, due to the self-limiting 
nature of the reactions of the precursor and co-reactant with the surface groups on the substrate. By 
carrying out a certain number of ALD cycles, the targeted ﬁlm thickness can be obtained. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of a typical ALD cycle consisting of two half-cycles. Sequential precursor 
and co-reactant doses are separated by purge or pump steps, leading to self-limiting ﬁlm growth. ‘M’ 
indicates the metal atom, which can for instance be bound to oxygen or nitrogen atoms (in blue), to 
form a metal oxide or metal nitride, respectively. Precursor ligands are colored green and are 
eliminated by reaction with the co-reactant before being purged away. 
Although the principle of ALD appears to be relatively simple, developing an ALD process is not 
necessarily a trivial task and it requires careful attention.6 Here, steps are suggested and described to 
successfully set up an ALD process. Although the steps are roughly ordered chronologically, repetition 
of some of the steps might be needed at a later stage. In summary, it is advised that the following steps 
are taken when developing an ALD process:  
1. Reactant selection: Which precursor and co-reactant will be used for the process? 
2. Composition: Is the deposited ﬁlm of the expected material composition? 
3. Thickness control: Does the ﬁlm thickness proceed linearly with cycles? 
4. Saturation: Are the precursor, co-reactant and purge steps in saturation? 
5. Properties: Does the material have the desired material properties? 
6. Temperature: Is ALD behavior observed for a range of deposition temperatures? 
7. Uniformity: Does the ﬁlm have the same thickness everywhere on the substrate table? 
8. Conformality: Is the ﬁlm thickness the same everywhere along 3D-structures? 
9. Nucleation: Does the initial growth on the substrate diﬀer from steady state growth? 
10. Other aspects: Are aspects such as safety, stability, reproducibility, etc. met?  
 
 
1. Precursor and co-reactant selection 
Before setting up an ALD process, a suitable combination of precursor and co-
reactant has to be decided on. Most importantly, the precursor and co-reactant 
molecules should consist of the appropriate elements, to obtain a material of the 
desired composition. In addition, they need to be reactive towards the surface 
groups present after the preceding subcycle, and in turn result in reactive surface 
groups after dosing.7 Moreover, volatility, thermal stability and reactivity need to be suﬃciently high.8 
Other requirements include availability and safety of the chemicals. Furthermore, reactor constraints 
and the application of the ALD ﬁlm have to be considered, since they can limit the choice of possible 
chemicals. In addition to selecting the precursor it has to be determined how the precursor will be 
delivered to the chamber: vapor drawn, carrier gas assisted (i.e. carrier gas ﬂowing over the precursor), 
bubbling (i.e. carrier gas ﬂowing through the precursor), etc.  
 
 
2. Chemical composition 
Soon after deposition of the ﬁrst ALD ﬁlm, it is valuable to check if the grown 
material consists of the intended elements. Common ways to investigate the 
chemical composition are X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Rutherford 
backscattering spectroscopy (RBS), although XPS is typically more readily available. 
In case the material should be conductive, a simple four-point probe conductivity 
measurement can tell if the material is of high purity. Furthermore, a quick assessment of the refractive 
index can also indicate whether the desired material is obtained. If the deposited material is very 
diﬀerent from the expectation, it might be good to reconsider Step 1, since proceeding can be a waste 
of time. However, in many cases, optimization of the deposition temperature or dosing and purge 
times can lead to improvement of the material composition. It is important to realize that the chemical 
composition and stoichiometry will determine the ﬁnal material properties.  
 
3. Thickness control 
An important characteristic of ALD is the deposition of the same amount of 
material in each cycle, allowing for ultimate thickness control.9 To conﬁrm this, the 
thickness or material increase is to be determined per cycle, which is called the 
growth per cycle (GPC). Determining the GPC can be done both in situ, by following 
the material increase during deposition, as well as ex situ, by depositing multiple 
samples with varying number of cycles. Typically, the ﬁlm thickness is measured (e.g. by spectroscopic 
ellipsometry), although alternative ways to check for linear growth are by determining the number of 
deposited atoms (e.g. by Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy) or deposited mass (e.g. by a quartz-
crystal microbalance). Figure 2 shows a typical example of the ﬁlm thickness increasing linearly with 
the number of ALD cycles. Note that the initial growth on the substrate might occur diﬀerently than at 
a later stage, as will be discussed in Step 9. For this reason the focus should lie on relatively thick ﬁlms, 
with thicknesses over ~15 nm. 
 
 
Figure 2. Typical example showing the ﬁlm thickness as a 
function of number of ALD cycles, illustrating the linear growth 
behavior which is typical for ALD. The growth per cycle (GPC) can 
be deﬁned as the slope of the thickness as a function of cycles. 
In case the deposited atoms or mass is measured as function of 
cycles, the GPC is given in terms of atoms per unit area or grams 
per unit area deposited per cycle. 
 
4. Saturation 
To conﬁrm self-limiting growth, one of the key characteristics of ALD, the growth 
per cycle (GPC) has to be determined as a function of dosing and purge times. In 
the case of a standard AB-type (i.e. two-step) process, the precursor dosing time, 
precursor purge time, the co-reactant exposure time and co-reactant purge time 
need to be optimized. This is done by choosing a relatively long time for three of 
the four times and keeping those constant, while varying the fourth. This needs to be done for every 
step and, logically, the ﬁrst step would be to conﬁrm saturation of the precursor dosing time (See 
Figure 3a). After this the saturation of the other dosing times can be investigated, and perhaps the 
whole procedure has to be reiterated with slightly diﬀerent dosing and purge times based on the 
ﬁndings. 
 
Ideally, a clear plateau is observed when investigating saturation, meaning that the GPC does not 
increase or decrease when more precursor/co-reactant is dosed, or the purge time is extended.9 
Certain phenomena can however cause deviation, such as precursor condensation and precursor 
decomposition in the case of the precursor saturation curve. In addition, too short co-reactant dosing 
times can cause impurity incorporation, while too short purge times (See Figure 3b) can lead to a 
parasitic CVD component (i.e. reaction of the precursor and co-reactant molecules in the gas phase or 
at the surface), which can impact conformal and uniform deposition. Too long dosing and purge times, 
on the other hand, can signiﬁcantly slow down the experiment, or in the case of industrial application, 
fabrication time. Note that it can also be insightful to perform experiments where only the precursor 
or co-reactant is dosed, to see if this leads to ﬁlm deposition or modiﬁcation of the substrate. 
Furthermore, saturation should also be conﬁrmed at other process conditions, such as diﬀerent table 
temperatures, as will be addressed later.  
 
 
Figure 3. Idealized growth per cycle (GPC) as a function of (a) reactant (precursor or co-reactant) dosing 
time and (b) purge time, illustrating the self-limiting ALD behavior. After saturation is reached, dosing 
additional precursor, or prolonging the purge time does not lead to a change in GPC. Note that it is 
important to include a measurement for the data point corresponding to 0 s precursor (or co-reactant) 
dosing time. When purge times are too short, parasitic CVD can occur, leading to a higher GPC. 
 
5. Material properties 
Apart from the desired chemical composition, several other material properties 
are highly important. Depending on the application of the ALD ﬁlms, it can be of 
interest to check the following: optical properties (refractive index n, absorption 
coeﬃcient α), electrical properties (resistivity ρ, carrier density Ne and mobility µ), 
ﬁlm and surface morphology (roughness, crystallinity Xc), et cetera. Note that the 
material properties are strongly linked to the chemical composition of the ﬁlms, which should be 
investigated in detail ﬁrst, and that tuning of the chemical composition can enable diﬀerent material 
properties.  
 
6. Temperature dependence  
Varying the deposition temperature can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on both the 
growth behavior and the material properties. For this reason, it is advised to 
deposit ﬁlms over a range of substrate temperatures, for example between 50 °C 
and 350 °C. ALD researchers often speak about an ALD window, i.e. a region where 
the GPC is (nearly) constant, allowing for reliable and repeatable results despite 
slight temperature variations (See Figure 4).10 However, this constant GPC is not a necessity for an ALD 
process, and it is mostly important that saturation behavior is found for all temperatures.  Eﬀects such 
as precursor condensation (at low temperature) and precursor decomposition (at high temperature) 
can namely become visible by verifying saturation at various temperatures. While a constant GPC is a 
desirable feature, numerous reports actually exist of ALD processes that demonstrate a temperature 
dependent GPC, but do show saturating ALD behavior over a wide temperature range. 
 
 
Figure 4. Growth per cycle (GPC) as a function of deposition 
temperature, showing the idealized ALD window. In addition, 
precursor related phenomena which can occur at high or low 
temperature are indicated.  
It should be noted that the actual temperature of the sample can be signiﬁcantly lower than the set 
temperature of the substrate table, especially when working with a warm (instead of hot) wall reactor 
at high vacuum. This diﬀerence in temperature can be due to the poor thermal contact between the 
table and the sample, which is pressure dependent.  
7. Uniformity 
Another important merit of ALD is the uniformity of the ﬁlm over large area 
substrates.11 Often, saturation is veriﬁed using coupon samples at the center of 
the substrate table, which doesn’t mean that precursor or co-reactant dosing is 
suﬃcient everywhere. Moreover, non-uniformity is generally a clearer signal of a 
CVD component than obtained through saturation curves. Hence, a good 
uniformity is evidence that the process is a well-behaving ALD process. Therefore, it is a recommended 
that a ﬁlm is deposited on the largest substrate that ﬁts in the ALD reactor. Most importantly, the 
thickness variation can easily be determined, either manually, or using an automated mapping stage. 
However, certain material properties such as composition and resistivity can also be important with 
respect to uniformity. It might for example be that the thickness uniformity of the deposited ﬁlm is 
good, while the resistivity of the ﬁlm varies signiﬁcantly over the substrate. 
8. Conformality  
Although often disregarded during ALD process development, the conformality of 
the ALD ﬁlm should be taken into account. Conformality is the ability to 
conformally deposit a ﬁlm on 3D structures, i.e. with (ideally) no variation in 
thickness along the structure.12 Instead of the conventional planar coupons, 
speciﬁc samples are required to assess the conformality, which contain trenches 
or vias. A way to quantify the conformality is to deposit in a vertical trench or via with a certain aspect 
ratio (AR), and, after preparation of a cross-section, calculate the ratio between the thickness at 
diﬀerent locations (See Figure 5). Another approach is to use a speciﬁcally designed structure with a 
lateral via, such as Pillar Hall,13 allowing for assessment of the thickness proﬁle without the need of a 
cross-section. In addition to conformality in terms of ﬁlm thickness, variations in material properties 
along the 3D structure can also be signiﬁcant. 

 
  
 
Figure 5. Schematic explaining conformality, which can be 
deﬁned as the ﬁlm thicknesses at diﬀerent positions in the 
trench relative to the thickness at the top of the trench. The 
trench has an aspect ratio (AR), deﬁned as the height of the 
trench divided by the width.  
 
9. Nucleation behavior  
The ﬁlm growth during an ALD process might initially show a diﬀerent behavior 
than at a later stage of the deposition (See Figure 6). The reason for this is that 
reactions of the precursor with the material and the chemical groups present on 
the substrate will probably occur diﬀerently than reactions with surface groups on 
the deposited ﬁlm. As is shown in Figure 6, it is generally possible to distinguish 
three cases that can manifest themselves during the initial cycles: linear growth, accelerated or 
enhanced growth, and delayed growth.14 The nucleation behavior can aﬀect material properties, such 
as defect or pinhole density, crystalline structure, and ﬁlm resistivity. Moreover, sometimes 
diﬀerences between growth on various substrates can be observed, which can be the starting point 
for an area-selective ALD process. This means that a delayed growth can be beneﬁcial in certain cases, 
although usually fast nucleation is desired for regular applications 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of the thickness as a function of number of 
ALD cycles, illustrating the diﬀerence between accelerated, 
linear, and delayed growth during the initial ALD cycles. 
  
Accelerated growth
Linear growth
Delayed growth

 
  
 
The nucleation behavior is strongly dependent on the growth mode of the ALD material. ALD of a 
metal on a metal oxide often starts with island growth, also Volmer-Weber-type growth, before a 
closed ﬁlms is obtained, while certain other materials growth in a layer-by-layer fashion or Frank-Van 
Der Merwe mode.15 Note that the growth mode depends on the diﬀerence in surface energy between 
the substrate and the deposited ﬁlm. After investigating the nucleation behavior, it is important to 
realize that speciﬁc thickness eﬀects may start playing a role in the growth behavior after the initial 
nucleation phase. For instance, crystallization of the ﬁlm after a certain ﬁlm thickness is reached might 
lead to an increase of the GPC.  
10. Other important aspects  
Several other aspects are also important during ALD process development, 
although they are not necessarily speciﬁc to ALD. 
i. Safety: Apart from considering the safety of the used chemicals, it is a very good 
idea to inform yourself whether any poisonous or potentially harmful reaction 
products are produced during the ALD reactions, or upon contact with the 
environment. Moreover, it should be checked if the ﬁlm material itself is not 
creating any safety risk.  
ii. Film stability: The stability of the deposited ﬁlms over time and their sensitivity to the 
environment (e.g. the ambient) need to be taken into account. Especially in case the ﬁlm is 
intended for use in a certain environment, it should be conﬁrmed if it can withstand these 
conditions (e.g temperature, humidity, etc.).  
iii. Reproducibility: It should be conﬁrmed that the same ﬁlm thickness and ﬁlm properties can be 
obtained by repeating the same deposition recipe. Conditioning of the reactor wall can play a 
role in this context, although variations in substrate temperature or reactor pressure can also 
be responsible for unwanted eﬀects.  
iv. Precursor consumption: Eﬃcient use of the precursor becomes more signiﬁcant for expensive 
precursors and can for instance be achieved by minimizing the size of the reactor chamber and 
by avoiding overdosing. Note that the required precursor dosing typically depends on the total 
surface area of the substrate, which is larger when working on 3D substrates. 
v. Precursor stability: Prolonged heating of the precursor, which is usually needed to obtain a 
certain vapor pressure, can sometimes cause degradation of the precursor. For this reason it 
might be needed to turn off the precursor heating during periods that no deposition runs are 
being performed.  
vi. Literature comparison: It is advised to verify whether the obtained results are in agreement 
with previous reports on the same (or very similar) ALD process, especially in terms of chemical 
composition and growth behavior. If this is not the case, an explanation for the distinctions 
should be found.  
vii. Device performance: The real test for the developed ALD process will be the application in a 
working device, such as a transistor or solar cell. Certain phenomena, for instance the presence 
of defect states or ﬁlm pinholes or incorporation of particles, might not be detected by basic 
characterization techniques and might only become visible when testing the ﬁlm in a device.  
References 
(1)  Leskelä, M.; Ritala, M. Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD): From Precursors to Thin Film 
Structures. Thin Solid Films 2002, 409, 138–146. 
(2)  Puurunen, R. L. Surface Chemistry of Atomic Layer Deposition: A Case Study for the 
Trimethylaluminum/Water Process. J. Appl. Phys. 2005, 97, 121301. 

 
  
 
(3)  George, S. M. Atomic Layer Deposition: An Overview. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 111–131. 
(4)  Miikkulainen, V.; Leskelä, M.; Ritala, M.; Puurunen, R. L. Crystallinity of Inorganic Films Grown 
by Atomic Layer Deposition: Overview and General Trends. J. Appl. Phys. 2013, 113, 021301. 
(5)  Johnson, R. W.; Hultqvist, A.; Bent, S. F. A Brief Review of Atomic Layer Deposition: From 
Fundamentals to Applications. Mater. Today 2014, 17, 236–246. 
(6)  Ritala, M.; Leskela, M. Atomic Layer Deposition. In Handbook of Thin Film Materials Volume 1: 
Deposition and Processing of Thin Films; 2002; Vol. 1, pp 103–159. 
(7)  Knoops, H. C. M.; Potts, S. E.; Bol, A. A.; Kessels, W. M. M. Atomic Layer Deposition. In 
Handbook of Crystal Growth: Thin Films and Epitaxy: Second Edition; Elsevier B.V., 2014; Vol. 
3, pp 1101–1134. 
(8)  Koponen, S. E.; Gordon, P. G.; Barry, S. T. Principles of Precursor Design for Vapour Deposition 
Methods. Polyhedron 2016, 108, 59–66. 
(9)  Puurunen, R. L. Growth per Cycle in Atomic Layer Deposition: Real Application Examples of a 
Theoretical Model. Chem. Vap. Depos. 2003, 9, 327–332. 
(10)  Leskelä, M.; Niinistö, J.; Ritala, M. 4.05 - Atomic Layer Deposition A2 - Hashmi, Saleem. In 
Comprehensive Materials Processing; 2014. 
(11)  Elers, K. E.; Blomberg, T.; Peussa, M.; Aitchison, B.; Haukka, S.; Marcus, S. Film Uniformity in 
Atomic Layer Deposition. Chem. Vap. Depos. 2006, 12, 13–24. 
(12)  Dendooven, J.; Detavernier, C. Basics of Atomic Layer Deposition: Growth Characteristics and 
Conformality. In Atomic Layer Deposition in Energy Conversion Applications; 2017. 
(13)  Pillar Hall: http://pillarhall.com/. 
(14)  Puurunen, R. L.; Vandervorst, W. Island Growth as a Growth Mode in Atomic Layer 
Deposition: A Phenomenological Model. J. Appl. Phys. 2004, 96, 7686. 
(15)  Puurunen, R. L. Random Deposition as a Growth Mode in Atomic Layer Deposition. Chem. 
Vap. Depos. 2004, 10, 159–170. 