Magneto-Optical and Muliferroic Properties of Transition-Metal (Fe,Co, or Ni)-Doped ZnO Layers Deposited by ALDAlbena Paskaleva,* Krastyo Buchkov, Armando Galluzzi, Dencho Spassov, Blagoy Blagoev,Tzvetan Ivanov, Vladimir Mehandzhiev, Ivalina Avramova Avramova, Penka Terzyiska, Peter Tzvetkov,Daniela Kovacheva, and Massimiliano PolichettiCite This: ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?43315 Read OnlineACCESS Metrics & More Article Recommendations *s? Supporting InformationABSTRACT: ZnO doped with transition metals (Co, Fe, or Ni) that have non-compensated electron spins attracts particularinterest as it can induce various magnetic phenomena and behaviors. The advanced atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique makesit possible to obtain very thin layers of doped ZnO with controllable thicknesses and compositions that are compatible with the mainmicroelectronic technologies, which further boosts the interest. The present study provides an extended analysis of the magneto-optical MO Kerr effect and the dielectric properties of (Co, Fe, or Ni)-doped ZnO films prepared by ALD. The structural, magneto-optical, and dielectric properties were considered in relation to the technological details of the ALD process and the correspondingdopant effects. All doped samples show a strong MO Kerr behavior with a substantial magnetization response and very high values ofthe Kerr polarization angle, especially in the case of ZnO/Fe. In addition, the results give evidence that Fe-doped ZnO alsodemonstrates a ferroelectric behavior. In this context, the observed rich and versatile physical nature and functionality open up newprospects for the application of these nanostructured materials in advanced electronic, spintronic, and optical devices.1. INTRODUCTIONZnO and ZnO-based materials are one of the most extensivelystudied materials because of the numerous advantages andpossible applications in a broad range of opto-, micro-, nano-,and acoustoelectronic devices.1?4 ZnO is a wide band-gap n-type semiconductor with a large excitonic binding energy. It ischemically stable; it has a good electrochemical activity and isbiocompatible and environmentally friendly. ZnO films can beeasily and successfully prepared by almost all depositiontechniques?magnetron sputtering, pulsed laser deposition,sol?gel spin coating, spray pyrolysis, chemical vapordeposition, atomic layer deposition (ALD), and so forth,resulting in a broad range of 1D, 2D, and 3D morphologies/microstructures. Consequently, mechanical, chemical, electri-cal, and optical properties of ZnO could be modified andimproved by the growth process and related processparameters, including annealing steps. Another efficient wayto tailor and enhance the ZnO properties is by doping withdifferent elements. The dopant and its concentration in theZnO matrix should be carefully chosen and optimized in orderto achieve the desired behavior. All this makes ZnO a veryversatile material whose properties can be properly tunedaccording to the specific requirements of the application.Moreover, it is possible to increase the functionality of ZnO bysimultaneous control over more than one parameter, whichopens up a wide range of exciting applications.From this point of view, doping with transition metals(TMs) Co, Ni, Mn, or Fe is of particular interest as they havepartially filled d-states, and hence, they contain non-compensated spin of electrons, which can induce magneticbehavior/phenomena (ferromagnetism and magnetoresist-Received: September 27, 2022Accepted: November 3, 2022Published: November 14, 2022Articlehttp://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf© 2022 The Authors. Published byAmerican Chemical Society43306https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?43315Downloaded via 151.53.218.174 on November 30, 2022 at 10:59:31 (UTC).See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.ance). Diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs) (i.e., semi-conductors with net spin polarization?e.g., ZnO in whichmagnetic TM ions substitute cations of the host semi-conductor material) are especially attractive for spintronicsand micro(nano)electronics as they allow realization ofsimultaneous control over the electronic state and carrierdynamics in the semiconductor and the robustness andcoherence of the magnetic spin of the TM. Room-temperature(RT) ferromagnetism (FM) in Mn-doped p-type ZnO hasbeen predicted by Dietl et al.5 First-principles calculations6,7based on density functional theory (DFT) also predicted FMin the most of the 3d TM-doped ZnO materials. Soon after,RT FM in doped ZnO was also experimentally observed,which consequently triggered intensive investigations.8?10Several mechanisms explaining the RT FM in TM-dopedZnO films have been proposed.11 The most widely acceptedare as follows: (i) the Ruderman?Kittel?Kasuya?Yoshida(RKKY), which results from the coupling mechanism relatedto the d shell electron spins mediated by conduction electronsinteractions and (ii) the mechanism of bound magneticpolarons (BMPs) formed by the s?d exchange interactionsbetween the electron spin of the nanoscale defect (e.g.,vacancy, secondary phase, etc.) and the electron spins ofsubstitutional 3d TM ions.12,13The magneto-optical (MO) properties of ZnO-based DMSsare also of particular interest as they allow us to combine thegood optical transparency of ZnO together with magnetism.MO phenomena [magnetic circular dichroism,14,15 the MOFaraday effect,16 and the MO Kerr effect17,18 (MOKE)] areinteresting both from the fundamental point of view and forthe application in various devices such as information storagesystems, magnetic field sensors, optical isolators, and so forth.In the MOKE technique, the change in the linear polarizationof the light reflected from the magnetic surface in a directrelation to the microscale magnetic hysteresis is studied. TheMOKE is a powerful tool to study the local electronic andmagnetic properties of materials.19?21 Enhancement of theMOKE can be obtained by a careful design of materials(including their thickness) and structures, for example, a largeKerr rotation angle reaching several degrees was reported forstructures consisting of stacked magnetic and dielectric thinfilms; Fabry?Perot cavities; 1D photonic crystals; and soforth.22?24ZnO has a hexagonal wurtzite structure (non-centrosym-metric P63mc space group) and possesses intrinsic polarizationalong the c-axis due to cation and anion tetrahedral alignmentin that direction. However, a large coercive field (>7 MV/cm)is needed for switching;25 hence, ferroelectricity in pure defect-free ZnO is difficult to observe. Incorporating optimizeddopants in ZnO can induce switchable polarization moreeffectively and easily. Ferroelectricity in doped ZnO is usuallyexplained with the difference in the ionic radii of dopant andZn2+ ions. Because of this difference, the dopant occupies anoff-centered position, which results in the formation of apermanent electrical dipole.26?28 Therefore, ferroelectricity indoped ZnO is most often reported for dopants with a relativelysmaller/larger ionic radius [e.g., V2+ (0.93 Å) and Cr3+ (0.63Å)] with respect to Zn2+ (0.74 Å). The coexistence of FM andferroelectricity in doped ZnO has also been reported in severalstudies.29?31Among the deposition methods, ALD of ZnO layers as wellas its doped counterparts has attracted increased attentionrecently as it enables the deposition of very thin (severalnanometers) homogeneous films with superior quality, whichcould be implemented in a wide variety of devices.32 Moreover,ALD is CMOS-compatible, which allows integration of ZnOlayers in micro- (nano-)electronic devices, including semi-conductor spintronic devices. However, there are only a fewreports that study TM (Ni, Co, and Fe) -doped ZnO filmsprepared by ALD, and these are confined to Co-doped ZnOfilms.32In this work, MO and dielectric properties of Ni-, Co-, orFe-doped ZnO layers deposited by ALD have beeninvestigated. To the best of our knowledge, this is the firststudy that reports the MO and dielectric behavior of ZnOlayers deposited by ALD and doped with various TMs (Fe, Ni,and Co) and compares their properties in dependence on thedopant.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE2.1. Deposition of Films. A standard thermal ALDprocess using a Beneq TFS-200 reactor system has been usedto deposit TM (Ni, Fe, or Co)?doped ZnO films. To obtain aZnO matrix, diethylzinc (DEZ) as a Zn precursor anddeionized (DI) water as an oxidant have been used, whereasfor TM doping, a metallocene (MCp2 = NiCp2; CoCp2; andFeCp2) precursor and ozone O3 have been used. The ALDsystem is equipped with HS-300 hot source containers tosupply the solid metallocene precursors. The ZnO/TMsupercycle consists of 16 cycles of DEZ/DI H2O followed byfive cycles of MCp2/O3, and it is repeated 24 times. Thedeposition is performed at 180 °C. Each precursor and oxidantpulse has been followed by a pure nitrogen purging at 300sccm flow. The pulse duration and purging times (p) for bothsubcycles have been as follows: DEZ/p/DI H2O/p = 0.2/2/0.2/2 s and MCp2/p/O3/p = 2/4/1/5 s, respectively. Themetallocene precursor has been heated up to 80 °C in order toenhance the sublimation process, hence its vapor pressure. TheALD process sequence is presented schematically in Figure S1.The films were deposited on p-type (100) Si substratescovered with a native SiO2 layer. The thickness of thedeposited TM-doped ZnO layers has been measured ellipso-metrically and is about 75 nm.Metal?doped ZnO?metal (MOM) structures with abottom electrode of TiN and a top electrode of Pt havebeen prepared for electrical measurements. The top Ptelectrodes (circles with an area of A = 1.96 × 10?3 cm?2)were deposited through a shadow mask.2.2. Material Characterization. The X-ray diffraction(XRD) patterns were collected within the 2? range from 10 to80° with a constant step of 0.02° on a Bruker D8 ADVANCEdiffractometer with Cu K? radiation and a LynxEye detector atRT. The phase identification was performed using theDiffracPlus EVA program using the ICDD-PDF2 Database.The unit cell volume and parameters were determined by thewhole powder pattern fitting procedure (Pawley fit) using theBruker TOPAS v.4.2 program.33,34 The crystallographicstructure visualization was performed using VESTA software.35The MO Kerr parameters were acquired using a magnetooptical Kerr magnetometer NanoMOKE3 under a longitudinalfield experimental setup based on a scanning laser microscopeprobe operating at ? = 660 nm, with an integrated opticalsystem with a pair of galvanometric mirrors. The maximalmagnetic field range is 4000 Oe with a varying frequency of 2.1Hz. The MOKE experiment is based on the measurement ofthe polarization change of the reflected light defined by theACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543307magnetization nature of the material surface in relation withthe spin and domain wall dynamics. The MO response isdescribed theoretically36 by the elements of the generaldielectric tensor (within the frame of the Jones matrixformalism) since the measured (at selected points and regions)hysteresis dependencies of the Kerr rotation versus field arealso proportional to the localized magnetization, which allowsindirect estimation of the coercivity Hc. The mapping of thematerial’s Kerr magnetization properties?the Kerr angle(?Kerr) and the related coercivity Hc?has been obtainedover different sectors with magnetic pixel resolutions of ?5 and10 ?m.Dielectric properties of doped ZnO films have been assessedby measuring capacitance?frequency (C?f) and capacitance?voltage (C?V) curves via an LCR meter (Agilent E4980A) atRT in a frequency range of 103 to 106 Hz. The ferroelectricproperties were evaluated on the Sawyer?Tower circuit using aKeysight DSOX1204G digital oscilloscope. Triangular ACvoltage was used with an amplitude of 2.5 V and f = 1.5 and 3kHz provided by the DSOX1204G built-in signal generator.3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION3.1. X-Ray Diffraction Analysis. The diffraction patternsof pure and TM-doped ZnO are presented in Figure 1. Atextured polycrystalline layer of nanosized ZnO with apredominant intensity of (100) and (002) index reflections,which confirms the formation of ZnO with a hexagonalwurtzite structure, is observed for all films. While the intensityof reflections with index (100) remains almost the same for allsamples, the intensity of (002) reflections varies depending onthe doping element. A similar dependence between theintensities of (100) and (002) reflections is also observed forthin films with a low degree of TM doping (with less TMdeposition cycles).37,38 Our previous studies revealed that theintensities of the measured ZnO reflections changedsignificantly depending also on both the deposition temper-ature39 and the degree of Al doping.40 The present resultsdemonstrate that in pure ZnO thin films, the orientation alongthe c-axis direction is significantly better expressed, which isproved by the high intensity of reflections with index (002). Incontrast, only reflections with index (100) were observed inthe Co-doped samples, indicating a change in the orientationof the ZnO crystallites with an ab-plane perpendicular to thesubstrate. In Ni- and Fe-doped thin films both orientations(100) and (002) (ab- and c- oriented respectively) are present.For Fe-doped sample, the intensity of the (100) peak issubstantially larger, that is, it is the preferred orientation. It isalso seen that in addition to (100) and (002), a low intensitydiagonal reflex (102), which is not observed in pure ZnO, alsoappears (Figure 1). Therefore, it could be concluded that inTM-doped ZnO films, disorientation increases. It should bementioned that no diffraction peaks different from thoserelated to ZnO and the Si substrate have been observed. Theamorphous halo at about 2? = 41.5° is observed in all samples(including the bare Si substrate before ZnO deposition) and isdue to the thin SiO2 layer on the surface. During thedeposition of ZnO, the Si substrate is additionally oxidized,and this oxidation is stronger in the case of doped ZnO layersas the ozone used in TM deposition cycles is a strongeroxidizing agent than the DI water used in ZnO depositioncycles. As a result, the intensity of the amorphous halo at 2? =41.5° increases for doped ZnO.The ZnO unit cell parameters and crystallite size (CS) for allsamples (Table 1) were calculated using the Pawley fit wholeprofile fitting procedure as implemented in Bruker Topas v.4.2software.33,34 The instrumental broadening correction wascalculated using the fundamental parameters approach.41 Theunit cell parameters of investigated TM-doped ZnO thin filmsare equal (within the systematic error) to the reference valuesFigure 1. XRD pattern comparisons of undoped ZnO and Fe, Co, and Ni doped ZnO layers with corresponding crystallographic (hkl) peakdesignations.Table 1. Cell Parameters and CS of Undoped ZnO and TM-Doped ZnOZnO on p-Si (100)sample a (Å) c (Å) CS (nm)ZnO (oxygen deficient) 3.242(2) 5.204(3) 38(2)ZnO 3.244(1) 5.208(1) 34.6(8)ZnO/Ni 3.238(1) 5.202(2) 28.4(12)ZnO/Co 3.240(1) 5.204(3) 20.5(12)ZnO/Fe 3.240(1) 5.202(2) 23.2(12)ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543308for ZnO (ICDD PDF-2 card no. 00-036-1451, SG:186, a =3.242 Å; c = 5.207 Å). Having in mind that the difference ofthe ionic radii of Zn2+, Co2+, Fe2+, and Ni2+ is less than 10%,together with the relatively low level of doping, it is expectedthat the doping should not affect the crystal metrics of theZnO matrix. A small difference is observed for the a-parameterof Ni-doped ZnO, most likely due to defects in the oxygensublattice. The mean CSs of pure and doped ZnO films werealso calculated (Table 1). The mean CS of pure ZnO isobtained in the range 35?38 nm, while those of all dopedcounterparts are in the range 20?30 nm, that is, the dopingresults in a reduction of the CS. In comparison to the morelightly TM-doped ZnO (with the CS in the range 35?60nm),38 the present more heavily doped ZnO samples have asmaller CS. Among the various doped layers, Ni-doped ZnOhas the largest CS?a result observed in both lightly andheavily doped films.3.2. Magnetic Coercivity and MO Kerr Rotation Angleof the Polarization. The magnetic properties of Co-, Fe-, andNi-doped ZnO and reference ZnO ALD layers wereinvestigated within the frames of the MOKE. To evaluatethe possible impact of oxygen vacancies, Vo, on the magneticresponse of ZnO layers, two ZnO layers with different amountsof Vo (as assessed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,Supporting Information Figure S2) have been investigated.Color gradient maps of the coercivity Hc and of the Kerrpolarization rotation angle ?Kerr at the magnetization saturationhave been constructed by measuring multiple Kerr hysteresisloops for each selected point. The behavior of the primaryMOKE characteristics was analyzed over several sectors on thefilm surface. For the purpose of clarity, selected Hc and ?Kerrgradient maps only of undoped (oxygen deficient) ZnO andFe-doped ZnO layers are shown in Figures 2 and 3. The Hcand ?Kerr maps of Ni- and Co-doped ZnO are similar to thoseof the ZnO/Fe layer. The corresponding coercivity map of theundoped ZnO (oxygen deficient) is uniform (Figure 2a); theobserved locations with very high Hc are stochasticallydistributed and can be assigned to the measurement artefacts.The Hc magnitude, the level of inhomogeneity and the overallmagnetization is significantly stronger for the Fe-doped sample(Figure 2b). For undoped ZnO, only clockwise Kerr rotation(i.e., positive +?Kerr values) is observed (Figure 3a). Generally,Figure 2. Maps of the coercivity variations for (a) ZnO (oxygen deficient) and (b) ZnO/Fe ALD layers.Figure 3. Maps of the Kerr angle variations for (a) ZnO (oxygen deficient) and (b) ZnO/Fe ALD layers.ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543309both undoped ZnO layers are homogeneous, and the values of?Kerr are very small?most of the data are in the range [0?20]mdeg. There are isolated locations where ?Kerr reaches values ashigh as 100 mdeg. Similarly to Hc maps, the Kerr angle map ofFe-doped ZnO (Figure 3b) differs substantially from that ofthe undoped film. The ZnO/Fe layer demonstrates inhomoge-neous distribution of ?Kerr whose values are significantly (2orders of magnitude) larger than those of the undoped layer.Another interesting feature is that both clockwise (positive?Kerr) and counterclockwise (negative ?Kerr) Kerr polarizationrotations are observed, indicative of complex MO processactivity.The inhomogeneity is also demonstrated in Figure 4a?ewhere example ?Kerr?H curves for undoped and TM-dopedZnO layers are presented. The observed complex microMOKE (diffracted and asymmetrical) hysteresis loops,particularly for the TM-doped samples, reveal the variationsand non-uniformity of the MO response. As is seen, thesevariations are significant in the case of TM-doped layers andfor a certain fraction of the measurements with broadhysteresis contours, and ?Kerr can reach significant values atthe maximum applied field. To account for these largevariations and to get more information on their origin, thestatistical distributions of the coercivity and Kerr angle areconsidered below.The descriptive statistical dispersion and variability of theacquired data are systematized in an comparative overview forall investigated layers and presented in Figures 5 and 6. For thesake of simplicity, the statistical distributions are divided inthree intervals of small Hc < 500 Oe, medium 500 Oe < Hc <1000 Oe, and large Hc > 1000 Oe coercivities and arepresented in the form of a pie chart diagram in the right handside of the figure. Similarly, for the Kerr rotation angle, theregions are defined as follows: small 100mdegKerr| | < ,medium 100 mdeg 1000 mdegKerr< | | < , and large1000 mdegKerr| | > .The undoped ZnO films show a weak magnetic behaviorwith the highest frequency (78%) of small coercivity values.The magnetic behavior of ZnO is very often assigned to theexistence of oxygen vacancies Vo.12,42 To account for thispossibility, two ZnO layers with different amounts of Vo havebeen studied. As is seen from the statistic comparisons, thelayer with the increased amount of Vo indeed reveals increasedrelative frequencies of the medium (500 Oe < Hc < 1000 Oe)range. However, the magnetic behavior of all doped counter-parts differs substantially from that of pure ZnO (including theZnO sample with increased Vo), which excludes the vacanciesas the main reason for the induced magnetic properties.Figure 4. Selected ?Kerr vs field hysteresis loops for (a) ZnO; (b) oxygen-deficient ZnO; and (c) Ni-, (d) Co-, and (e) Fe-doped ZnO layers. Theinsets show example curves with large hysteresis and Kerr angle values.ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543310For all doped layers, the Hc statistical dispersions presentedin Figure 5a?e are relatively broad; nevertheless, severaltendencies are clearly observed:- Magnetization for all TM-doped ZnO layers increasessubstantially?the regions with small magnetizationdecrease to about 33?41% (in dependence on thedopant) compared to more than 70% for the undopedlayers. Respectively, the frequencies of medium and largemagnetization values increase.The major percentage fraction with Hc > 500 Oe, that is,medium and large coercivity values, depends on thedopant and increases with the doping element in thefollowing order?Ni, Co, and Fe. In the same order doesthe fraction of high magnetization values increase also:Hc > 1000 Oe?ZnO/Ni ?19%, ZnO/Co?26% andZnO/Fe?31%. It should be noticed that this orderfollows precisely the order of the corresponding free(unpaired) 3d spins: Ni(?)?one, Co(??)?two, andFe(???)?three unpaired spins.It is known that the MOKE is proportional to spin?orbitinteraction and net spin polarization; hence, it preferentiallysenses magnetic electrons (i.e., in our case 3d electrons).43Therefore, these results unambiguously demonstrate that theobserved magnetic behavior of TM-doped ZnO layers stemsfrom the magnetic properties of the dopant; hence, they giveevidence that the applied ALD scheme resulted in theformation of a (diluted) magnetic semiconductor.14 A possibleformation of TM clusters and/or TM oxides could also add tothe increased magnetic response of the layers. However, havingin mind the similar behavior of all TM-doped layers anddissimilar magnetic properties of their respective TM oxides(e.g., NiO is antiferromagnetic and Fe oxides are ferromag-netic), we can exclude TM oxides as a dominant reason for theobserved strong MO response of the layers. In addition, XRDspectra do not show any peaks that may be related to TMphases.The statistical distribution of ?Kerr values (Figure 6a?e)demonstrates in a more straight forward way the substantialqualitative and quantitative difference between the pure andTM-doped ZnO films. The undoped ZnO layers reveal veryweak MO activity with the majority of ?Kerr values less than 20mdeg (Figure 6a,b). All TM-doped layers (Figure 6c?e)exhibit very large ?Kerr values, which are symmetricallydistributed with respect to 0. Depending on the dopant,similar trends to those observed for the coercivity appearedfrom the ?Ke r r distr ibut ions . The fract ion with100 mdegKerr| | > increases with the dopant in the order Ni,Co, and Fe. The fraction of very large 1000 mdegKerr| | >increases in the same order, that is, 12% for ZnO/Ni; 20% forZnO/Co, and 33% for ZnO/Fe. It should be noted that forZnO/Fe, ?Kerr values as high as 5° have been observed, whilefor the other two dopants, the maximal ?Kerr reaches ?2°. Thefact that the identified giant MO Kerr rotation is characteristicfor all TM-doped layers and symmetric around the zerosuggests a common underlying MO mechanism. It is also seenthat the strength of the Kerr effect is correlated with themagnetization, that is, the maximal Kerr rotation is observedfor ZnO/Fe, which reveals the largest Hc and vice versa?theweakest MOKE is demonstrated by ZnO/Ni, which has thesmallest observed magnetization. This is consistent with theexpected trend for ferromagnetic materials that the Kerr angleincreases with magnetization.34 The broadly varied MO Kerrparameters are dependent on localized Fe, Co, and Niconcentration variations, implying randomized inhomogeneousdistribution of the dopants in the crystal structure.17 On theother hand, considering the alternating layer by layer (ZnOFigure 5. Statistical distributions of Hc variation for (a) ZnO; (b) oxygen-deficient ZnO; and (c) Ni-, (d) Co-, and (e) Fe-doped ZnO layers.ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543311and TMO) deposition process of the ALD technique, we haveto point out the significant MOKEs detected in ZnO-basedMO cavity/dielectric (with low optical losses) nano-laminates(Fabry?Perot type).23,24,44,45 The optical enhancement(several orders of magnitude) of MO Kerr polarizationrotation in such structures is related to internal interferenceeffects and the addition of multiple reflections in thenanolayered architecture?dependent on the layer arrange-ment, thickness, and the reflective properties of the substratematerial. We suppose that the observed extreme variations inthe MO Kerr response are related to the complex synergeticinfluence of all noted factors. Various types of materialsdemonstrate such enhanced MOKE polarization rotation,some of which share the similar universal mutliferroic natureto that for the investigated TMO/ZnO layers?nanostructuredplasmonic dielectrics,46 artificially nano-engineered metamate-rials,47 2D TM dichalcogenides, and topological insulators.483.3. Dielectric and Ferroelectric Properties. Variationsof the dielectric constant, ?r, and the dielectric loss (tan ?) ofthe samples in the frequency range 1 kHz to 1 MHz are shownin Figure 7a,b. A strong frequency dependence of the dielectricconstant is observed, especially for Fe- and Ni-doped ZnO.Various polarization mechanisms (ionic, orientation, and spacecharge) can exist in the layers and give rise to an increasedpolarization (hence ?r) at a certain frequency. For ZnO/Fe, ?rchanges only slightly in the range f = 103?105 Hz, and for f >105 Hz, a steep decrease is observed. For the ZnO/Ni film, it isseen that there is another polarization mechanism, which isinvolved at f = 103?104 Hz and significantly increases ?r in thisfrequency range. The most likely polarization mechanism,which adds to the net polarizability in the range 103?105 Hz, isthe orientation (dipolar) polarization.49 We suggest that theFigure 6. Statistical distributions of Kerr angle variations for (a) ZnO; (b) oxygen-deficient ZnO; and (c) Ni-, (d) Co-, and (e) Fe-doped ZnOlayers.Figure 7. Frequency dependence of (a) dielectric constant ?r and (b)dielectric loss tan ? and (c) capacitance?voltage characteristics ofTM-doped ZnO films.ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240ACS Omega 2022, 7, 43306?4331543312substitution of dopant ions at Zn sites results in Fe?O (Ni?O) bond formation. These bonds are non-collinear and rotatemore easily, thus enhancing the dielectric response of thelayer.50 The present results suggest that dipolar polarization isstronger in Fe-doped ZnO. Another mechanism that cansubstantially increase polarization is the charge build-up andpolarization at grain boundaries and/or heterointerfaces (alsoknown as Maxwell?Wagner polarization). From this point ofview, the formation of NiO clusters in the ZnO matrix, whichwas suggested to occur in similar layers with lower Nidoping,37 is a possible explanation for the increased ?r at f =103?104 Hz. It should be noted that the calculated staticdielectric constant ?r of Fe- and Ni-doped ZnO layers issignificantly larger than that of the host ZnO, which is usuallyreported to be ?r = 8?9.51 Recently, Vegesna et al.51 attributedthe increase of the static dielectric constant in magnetic n-typeCo- and Mn-doped ZnO layers to the contribution of BMPs tothe electrical polarization. These polarons are formed by s?dexchange interaction between electron spins of the positivelycharged oxygen vacancy Vo+ in the BMP center and theelectron spins of substitutional dopant ions. Having in mindthe ferromagnetic behavior of the Fe- and Ni-doped ZnO, asobserved in the previous section, it can be concluded that theincreased static dielectric constant may be indeed partly due toBMPs. The dielectric response of the ZnO/Co film issignificantly weaker than that of the other two films??r issubstantially smaller than that of ZnO/Ni and ZnO/Fe films; itis also smaller than that of pure ZnO layers. However, it shouldbe noticed that the measurement of C?f curves is performed ata small voltage (0.3?0.5 V) where the capacitance of the ZnO/Co film has the minimum in the C?V curves, while that of theother two films reaches its maximum, as shown in Figure 7c.In Figure 8, the ferroelectric P?V hysteresis loops for TM-doped ZnO films measured on a Sawyer?Tower circuit areshown. The Fe-doped layers (Figure 8a) reveal a ferroelectric-like behavior with a well-resolved P?V loop and thepolarization increasing with the decreasing frequency. Theresults for Ni- and Co-doped layers, though showing some P?V hysteresis, are not that convincing for the existence offerroelectricity. It should be mentioned that all layers have arelatively high dielectric loss (Figure 7b), which is due to theincreased conductivity of the layers. This could compromisethe shape of the P?V loop as well as the values of P, which aremuch higher than usually reported for ZnO-based materials.The observed stronger ferroelectric behavior of Fe-doped ZnOis in a very good agreement with the observed higher ?r ofZnO/Fe layers in the range f = 104?106 Hz as compared to theother films (Figure 7a) and the suggested domination ofdipolar polarization in this frequency range for the ZnO/Fefilm. It should be mentioned also that among the three TMsused, Fe3+ has the smallest radius (Fe3+?0.63 Å; Ni2+?0.69Å; and Co2+?0.72 Å) with respect to Zn2+ (0.74 Å), whichcan explain its strongest ferroelectric response.4. CONCLUSIONSThin TM (Fe, Co, or Ni)-doped ZnO films are successfullydeposited by ALD. The study of their MO properties revealsthat all TM-doped layers have qualitatively and quantitativelydifferent behaviors compared to that of pure ZnO. All dopedfilms demonstrate a very strong MOKE?both the magneticcoercivity and Kerr polarization angle are substantially largerthan that of undoped ZnO. It is shown that the magneticnature of the dopants is responsible for the observed enhancedMO response, which increases with the increasing number offree 3d electron spins, that is, in the order Ni(?), Co(??), andFe (???). The dielectric response of the investigated TM-doped ZnO films also depends very strongly on the dopant.The obtained results imply that several polarization mecha-nisms could be involved to explain the observed behavior. Fe-doped ZnO reveals the strongest dipolar polarization, whichmay explain the observed ferroelectric-like behavior in thislayer.The obtained results open up a wide perspective for furtherresearch. Especially, they give some hints that DMSs may beformed by the used ALD scheme. Moreover, Fe-doped ZnOholds particular promise as it demonstrates the strongest MOresponse accompanied by a ferroelectric-like behavior; hence,it may possess a true multiferroic nature provided the twoproperties (ferroelectric and ferromagnetic) are coupled.However, more investigations are needed to get in-depthview and to clarify the phenomena taking place and theirdependence on the dopant as well as to outline rationalstrategy to control them. This also includes the optimization ofthe ALD scheme to obtain more homogeneous and control-lable doping of ZnO.? ASSOCIATED CONTENT*s? Supporting InformationThe Supporting Information is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.2c06240.ALD scheme of TM-doped ZnO and O 1s X-rayphotoelectron spectroscopy peaks of ZnO and oxygen-deficient ZnO (PDF)? AUTHOR INFORMATIONCorresponding AuthorAlbena Paskaleva ? Institute of Solid State Physics, BulgarianAcademy of Sciences, Sofia 1784, Bulgaria; orcid.org/0000-0002-4409-1915; Email: paskaleva@issp.bas.bgFigure 8. P?V hysteresis loops for (a) Fe-; (b) Co-; and (c) Ni-doped ZnO films.ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1021/ac
